Vol.:(0123456789)
Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13679-024-00585-w
REVIEW
Mexican Clinical Practice Guidelines for Adult Overweight and Obesity 
Management
Emma A. Chávez‑Manzanera1,2 · Juan M. Vera‑Zertuche1,3 · Martha Kaufer‑Horwitz1,4 · 
Verónica Vázquez‑Velázquez2,5 · José R. Flores‑Lázaro6 · Leonor Mireles‑Zavala1 · Raúl Calzada‑León1,7 · 
Juan C. Garnica‑Cuellar1,8 · Verónica Sánchez‑Muñoz5 · Eduardo Ramírez‑Butanda2 · Ricardo Hernández‑González1 · 
María A. Vargas‑Martínez9 · Hugo Laviada‑Molina1,10 · Rafael Violante‑Ortíz1,11 · Héctor Esquivias‑Zavala12 · 
Eduardo García‑García1 · Fernando J. Lavalle‑González1,13 · Leonardo Mancillas‑Adame1,14,15 · 
Juan C. López‑Alvarenga1,16 · Juan F. Pérez‑Hernández2 · Erika V. Soto‑Fuentes2 · Reina R. Soriano‑Cortés2 · 
Eduardo W. Goicoechea‑Turcott17 · Gerardo Magallanes‑Díaz18 · Miguel F. Herrera‑Hernández3 · 
Simón Barquera‑Cervera19 · Edith Vargas‑Contreras20 · Cybele B. Díaz‑Wionczek5 · Morgan Salmon5 · 
Dinorah Ramírez‑De Jesús5 · Juan P . Villaseñor‑Díaz5 · Javiera Peña21 · José Ramos‑Rojas21 · Camila Ávila‑Oliver21 · 
Gabriel Rada21 · Brad Hussey22 · Ximena Ramos Salas23
Accepted: 16 August 2024 / Published online: 2 October 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Purpose To develop Mexico’s first methodologically rigorous clinical practice guideline for the management of adult over-
weight and obesity. The target audiences are interdisciplinary healthcare professionals across healthcare systems who are 
the first point of contact for patients with obesity in Mexico, patients, and health system decision makers.
Recent Findings A review of recent international obesity clinical practice guidelines and an expert consensus process identi-
fied: i) common recommendations appropriate for implementation in Mexico and ii) knowledge gaps requiring the formula-
tion of new recommendations. In all, 20 new recommendations and 20 good practice statements were developed using the 
GRADE Evidence-to-Decision Framework and expert consensus.
Summary Overweight and obesity negatively impact the health and well-being of individuals and populations in Mexico. 
This guideline aims to establish a new evidence-based, patient-centered, non-stigmatizing, and practical treatment and man-
agement framework, based on the fundamental principles of chronic disease prevention and management.
Keywords Overweight · Obesity · Chronic disease care · Management · Clinical guidelines
Introduction
Health complications related to overweight and obesity rep-
resent significant public health problems in Mexico [1 , 2]. 
As a heterogeneous, progressive, and relapsing chronic dis-
ease characterized by excess and/or dysfunctional adipose 
tissue that impairs health and well-being, obesity requires 
long-term, integrated, individualized, and evidence-based 
prevention, treatment, and management [3–13].
The impact of obesity on quality of life and health out-
comes has been extensively documented, indicating that it 
is the primary contributor to years of life lost due to dis-
ability [14]. Specifically, obesity is highly implicated in 
both the development and exacerbation of cardiometabolic 
diseases (e.g., hypertension, diabetes, gout, dyslipidemia), 
mechanical diseases (e.g., sleep apnea, acid reflux disease, 
gallbladder disease, urinary incontinence, osteoarthritis), 
at least 12 types of cancer (e.g., esophageal, endometrium, 
colon, breast) [15], and mental health conditions (e.g., anxi-
ety, depression, binge eating disorder) [16, 17]. Obesity is 
also a highly stigmatized disease; experiencing weight bias, 
stigma, and weight-based discrimination negatively impacts 
health and social outcomes independent of body mass index 
(BMI) or weight status [18].
At the population level, the prevalence of overweight 
and obesity is estimated using proxy measures for body fat, 
such as BMI, calculated as weight in kilograms divided by 
height in meters squared (kg/m2). Although anthropometric Extended author information available on the last page of the article
644 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
measures are not accurate measures of obesity, existing 
prevalence studies rely solely on BMI, making it the most 
widely used tool to assess the impact of obesity. Globally, 
BMI levels have been increasing, and as many as 650 mil-
lion individuals could be living with obesity [19]. Based on 
BMI, it is estimated that approximately 36.9% of the adult 
population in Mexico live with this disease, impacting more 
women than men (41% vs 32.3%) [2]. In addition, 38.3% of 
the Mexican adult population is classified in the overweight 
category (BMI 25–29.9 kg/m 2) and may be at risk for obe-
sity and other obesity-related non-communicable diseases, 
such as cardiovascular disease. In Mexico, adults classified 
in the overweight category are 5.25 times more likely to have 
mixed dyslipidemias and hypertriglyceridemia, two major 
cardiovascular disease risk factors [1].
Between 2016 and 2022, the prevalence of obesity 
(BMI ≥  30 kg/m 2) increased from 33.3% [30.9, 35.9] to 
36.9% [35.0, 38.7], an annualized rate of increase of 1.4% 
compared with previous years [2 ]. For example, between 
2000 and 2006, the prevalence of obesity increased from 
23.5% [22.6, 24.4] to 30.4% [29.5, 31.3], represent-
ing an annualized rate of 2.3%. However, severe obesity 
(BMI ≥ 35 kg/m 2) has continued to increase at signifi-
cant rates from 2016 to 2022, with Class II obesity (BMI 
35–39.9 kg/m 2) increasing by 6.1% (from 8.2% to 8.7% 
of the population) and Class III obesity (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m 2) 
increasing by 37.9% (from 2.9% to 4.0% of the population) 
[2, 20, 21]. The rise in the prevalence of severe obesity poses 
a significant public health concern, given that it is linked to 
a greater risk for poor health and premature death compared 
with Class I obesity [22].
Obesity rates in Mexico exhibit significant variation 
across different populations, influenced by factors such as 
age, sex, socioeconomic status, and geographic location. 
Additionally, indigenous populations in Mexico experience 
distinct challenges, including economic marginalization 
and limited healthcare access, which have been shown to 
exacerbate obesity and related complications [2 ]. Obesity 
and excessive weight gain during pregnancy is linked to an 
increased risk of complications, including gestational dia-
betes mellitus, preeclampsia, caesarean delivery, perineal 
lacerations, postpartum hemorrhage, venous thromboem-
bolism, and postpartum depression [23, 24]. For neonates, 
risks include perinatal fractures, perinatal asphyxia, cerebral 
hemorrhage, shoulder dystocia and neonatal death. Obesity 
in pregnancy can also present a higher risk for childhood 
obesity, cardiometabolic syndrome, early puberty, behavio-
ral changes, and attention deficit disorder [25– 29]. Obesity 
in pregnancy has also been associated with long-term con-
sequences on metabolic functions and in anthropometry by 
transgenerational inheritance of obesity [25– 30].
Obesity drivers vary across individuals and popu-
lations and involve a complex interaction of genetic, 
psychological, behavioral, environmental, medical, and 
socioeconomic factors. Researchers have investigated 
the drivers of obesity for many years, and various ini-
tiatives have been implemented to prevent this disease, 
yielding inconsistent outcomes and lacking the magni-
tude many believe is required to make necessary impact 
[31]. In recent years, there have been significant advances 
in Mexico toward primary obesity prevention, acknowl-
edged as international best practices by the World Health 
Organization (WHO). These include implementing taxes 
on soft drinks, sugary beverages, and energy-dense ultra-
processed foods; introducing warning labels on packaged 
food and drinks; regulating the presence and advertising of 
unhealthy products in schools; and formulating new sus-
tainable and nutritious dietary guidelines for the Mexican 
population. However, there's a pressing need to incorpo -
rate additional cost-effective policies, such as enhancing 
access to nutritious foods and clean water and regulating 
the marketing of unhealthy foods targeting children [32].
Effective treatment and management of obesity requires 
providing long-term, evidence-based, and high-quality 
healthcare services (e.g., behavioral and psychological inter-
ventions, pharmacotherapy, and bariatric surgery adjunctive 
to medical nutrition therapy and physical activity) [5, 8, 33]. 
Enhancing existing healthcare services entails identifying 
key opportunities, such as training healthcare professionals 
in various disciplines involved in treating individuals with 
obesity across healthcare systems, refining healthcare quality 
monitoring processes along with implementing necessary 
evidence-based obesity treatment interventions and long-
term management approaches. Historically, the benchmark 
for obesity care was set by official Mexican government 
standards (official norms), which proved insufficient due to 
challenges in development and updating processes [32, 34]. 
Mexico also lacks access to specialized multidisciplinary 
health teams to support patients living with obesity, and, as 
in most other countries, the majority of healthcare profes-
sionals do not receive obesity training and feel ill-equipped 
to treat obesity [35, 36].
In 2019, it was estimated that the total cost of overweight 
and obesity in Mexico (including direct healthcare costs, as 
well as indirect costs, such as premature death, absenteeism, 
and presenteeism) amounted to US$23.17 billion; [ 19] the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
estimates that obesity will reduce Mexico’s gross domestic 
product by 5.3% by 2050, with direct healthcare expendi-
tures reaching 8.9% of Mexico’s total health expenditure [21, 
37]. Considering the impact of obesity on health and well-
being as well as the economy in Mexico, obesity preven-
tion, treatment, and management efforts must be intensified 
across all fronts to stave off predicted increases in disease 
prevalence by 2030. Achieving this goal demands a shared 
vision of required interventions, political commitment, 
645Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
adequate infrastructure, funding, efficient implementation, 
and societal support [38].
Crafting new clinical practice guidelines, founded on the 
most current evidence and tailored to the national landscape, 
will support secondary prevention, treatment, and manage-
ment measures for obesity in Mexico. Given Mexico's role 
as one of the front-runner countries in the Acceleration Plan 
for Obesity, initiated by the WHO, UNICEF, and the World 
Obesity Federation, these guidelines represent a valuable 
contribution and an essential instrument for enhancing a 
national response.
Although obesity consensus statements exist [16], this 
document represents Mexico’s first methodologically rigor-
ous clinical practice guideline generated through a system-
atic assessment of published evidence, under the guidance 
of an independent methods team, using the Grading of Rec-
ommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation 
(GRADE) Evidence-to-Decision (EtD) framework [39], 
and with input from and participation of patients living with 
obesity. The latter provided information related to the values 
and preferences of patients, reviewed and formulated rec -
ommendations, and participated in shared decision-making 
throughout the process in collaboration with interdiscipli-
nary subject matter experts [40].
Without the development and implementation of evi-
dence-based clinical practice guidelines, patients and health-
care professionals have had to navigate a complex system of 
non-evidence-based and internationally unregulated obesity 
treatment products and programs that can contribute to more 
harm at the individual level and a progression of the disease 
at the population level.
Methods
Panel Composition
The Mexican Society of Nutrition and Endocrinology (Span-
ish acronym: SMNE) assembled a Steering Committee (SC) 
comprising interdisciplinary experts working in obesity 
research and clinical practice (n = 14). The SC included one 
chair [E.A.C.M.], 13 endocrinologists [E.A.C.M., J.E.G.G., 
L.M.A., L.M.Z., F.J.L.G., H.A.L.M., R.C.L., J.M.V.Z., 
R.V.O., J.C.G.C, R.H.G, J.C.L.A., E.A.V.C.], and a dieti-
tian [M.K.H.] to oversee the guideline development process 
and to agree on general principles, scope, and target audi-
ences (Appendix I). The SC met weekly via online platforms 
(Zoom) and discussed issues electronically as needed (What-
sApp) between December 2023 and July 2024.
An Advisory Committee (AC), consisting of lead inter -
disciplinary authors (e.g., psychology, psychiatry, nutrition, 
sports medicine and physical activity, bariatric surgery, and 
epidemiology) and one person living with obesity (n = 16) 
(Appendix I), worked with the SC to propose, prioritize, and 
finalize research questions using a Delphi-based consensus 
process via an online survey and group discussions. The AC 
met at least once monthly via Zoom.
SC and AC members completed a 20-h online training 
course on GRADE EtD methodology, provided by Episte-
monikos Foundation, an independent, not-for-profit organi-
zation that aims to provide reliable information to healthcare 
decision makers.
A Patient Committee (PC) engaged people living with 
obesity recruited through two organizations: i) Obesidades, 
a Mexican nonprofit civil society that raises awareness about 
obesity and provides training to healthcare professionals 
and students, and ii) the Obesity Clinic at National Institute  
of Medical Sciences and Nutrition Salvador Zubirán (Insti-
tuto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador  
Zubirán) in Mexico City (Appendix I). The PC (n = 4) 
met monthly via Zoom and held online discussions via  
WhatsApp. Input on good practice statements and clinical 
recommendations was received from the PC through online 
and in-person meetings.
The members of all committees met in person in June 
2024 to develop the final recommendations with support 
and guidance from the Epistemonikos Foundation. SMNE 
staff and consultants provided administrative support and 
project coordination for the guideline development process. 
Table  1 outlines the guideline development process and the 
responsibilities of each group of participants.
Management of Competing Interests
Funding for the development of the guidelines was provided 
in the form of unrestricted industry grants (Novo Nordisk, 
Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim) to SMNE, as well as in-kind 
support from the scientific, professional, and patient volun-
teers engaged in the process. Representatives from industry 
sponsors had no presence or input and played no role in 
any stage of the guideline development process, including 
the preparation of PICO (population [P], intervention [I], 
comparator [C], and outcome [O]) questions, evidence syn-
thesis and grading, the development of recommendations 
and the preparation of this manuscript, and therefore have 
not influenced the guideline's content in any manner. None 
of the committee members were remunerated for their work 
on the guidelines.
The SC developed and managed a competing interest 
policy and procedures for mitigating bias. Detailed compet-
ing interest declarations (using the International Committee 
of Medical Journal Editors’ disclosure form) were collected 
for all members of the SC, AC, and PC, as well as participat-
ing methodologists from Epistemonikos Foundation, staff, 
and consultants. Individuals with relevant disclosures were 
not excluded from voting on recommendations. However, 
646 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
the SC asked individuals with direct competing interests to 
abstain from voting in the areas in which they had a conflict. 
Methodologists from the Epistemonikos Foundation, who 
had no competing interests, independently conducted the 
entire evidence synthesis processes using standard GRADE 
EtD framework procedures and moderated consensus panels. 
They drafted and reviewed all new recommendations and 
good practice statements to ensure fidelity with the evidence.
Target Audiences and Selection of Priority Topics
The principal target audience for this guideline is healthcare 
professionals who are the first point of contact for patients 
in Mexico who seek/require evidence-based care to man -
age their obesity. This includes any interdisciplinary health-
care professional working across various healthcare levels 
and clinical settings, including primary care and specialist 
services. Secondary audiences include patients living with 
obesity and health system decision makers.
The SC identified specific clinical challenges facing 
patients in Mexico, and those faced by the healthcare pro-
fessionals who treat them. They defined the guideline scope 
and priority topics based on a review of recommendations 
put forward by recent U.S. [5], European [33], and Canadian 
[8] clinical practice guidelines for adult obesity. Although 
overweight and obesity prevention (primary and secondary), 
treatment, and management initiatives are needed in Mexico, 
primary prevention and public health approaches are beyond 
the scope of this guideline. Thus, only research questions 
focused on clinical challenges related to secondary preven-
tion, treatment, and management of overweight and obesity 
in the Mexican adult population were prioritized.
In a five-round Delphi survey process, the SC and AC 
reviewed primary recommendations from the U.S., Euro-
pean, and Canadian obesity guidelines and identified recom-
mendations perceived as the most relevant, appropriate, and 
useful for the Mexican population and healthcare services 
landscape. In the first round, the SC reviewed 80 statements 
from the three international guidelines, and statements with 
an agreement of 50% or higher were selected. In the second 
round, the SC and AC added 35 new clinical challenges or 
statements, and those with an agreement of 50% or higher 
were selected. In the third to fifth rounds, statements with 
75% agreement were selected. The Delphi survey was con-
ducted from September 2023 to February 2024.
Following this process, 20 clinical challenges were con-
sidered high priority and relevant for Mexico and used to 
create new PICO questions that were addressed using the 
standardized GRADE EtD framework to develop recommen-
dations (Table  2). Methodologists from the Epistemonikos 
Foundation supported the translation from clinical questions 
into PICO questions.
Evidence Synthesis
The Epistemonikos Foundation methods team conducted 
an evidence synthesis process on the effects of interven-
tions, the importance of outcomes, resource use, and con-
siderations of equity, acceptability, and feasibility of treat-
ment alternatives. Eligibility criteria were defined for the 
components of each prioritized question. Systematic reviews 
and randomized trials that met the inclusion criteria for each 
question were included to inform the intervention effects 
criteria. Only systematic reviews were considered for the 
other EtD criteria.
A search for systematic reviews was conducted through 
the Epistemonikos Foundation database until May 29, 2024. 
The Epistemonikos Foundation database is a comprehensive 
database of systematic reviews relevant to health decision-
making that is maintained by screening multiple sources 
of information to identify systematic reviews and their 
included primary studies, including the Cochrane database 
Table 1  Guideline Development Process and Roles
SC =steering committee, AC = advisory committee, PC = patient committee
Action Responsibility Approach
Oversight, identify the scope, selection of key topics, 
target audiences and fundamental guideline principles 
based on existing international guidelines and consen-
sus
SC Weekly meetings and discussions
Develop and prioritize research PICO questions using 
Delphi-based consensus process
SC and AC Five Delphi-based consensus survey
Conduct literature search and screening, synthesize data, 
assess the certainty of evidence, and prepare summary 
of findings and EtD tables
Epistemonikos Foundation Evidence synthesis and GRADE
Develop and approve recommendations based on EtD 
Framework
SC, AC, PC, and Epistemonikos Foundation Three day in-person workshop
Develop and approve good practice statements SC, AC, PC, and Epistemonikos Foundation Online survey and two online meetings
647Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
Table 2  Prioritized Topics, Sub-Topics, and Research Questions
Key Topic Clinical Challenge Research Question (Spanish) Research Question (English Translation)*
Clinical Evaluation
Obesity and cardiovascular disease En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se deben 
usar escalas para evaluar el riesgo cardiovascular en atención 
primaria en comparación con no utilizarlas?
In adults aged 18 years or older who live with overweight or obesity, 
should risk scoring tools be used to assess cardiovascular risk in 
primary care**, compared to not using them?
Obesity and reproductive health En mujeres en etapa reproductiva que desean embarazarse y tienen 
obesidad pregestacional, ¿se debe referir a un programa multidisci-
plinario en comparación con tratamiento convencional?
In women of reproductive age who wish to become pregnant and have 
pregestational obesity, should they be referred to a multidisciplinary 
program compared to conventional treatment?
Interdisciplinary obesity care En adultos de 18 años o más con obesidad grado 2 con o sin comor-
bilidades, ¿se debe referir a un programa multidisciplinario en 
comparación con tratamiento convencional?
In adults 18 years of age or older with Class 2 obesity with or without 
comorbidities, should they be referred to a multidisciplinary pro-
gram versus conventional treatment?
Treatment and Follow-up
Medical nutrition therapy En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿el plan de 
alimentación debe ser prescrito por un nutriólogo en comparación 
con un médico de primer contacto?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should a 
dietary plan be prescribed by a nutritionist compared to a physician 
at the first point of contact?
En adultos mexicanos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, 
¿se debe usar la Dieta de la Milpa (tipo de dieta tradicional Mexi-
cana) en comparación con una dieta hipoenergética equilibrada?
In Mexican adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, 
should the Milpa Diet (type of traditional Mexican diet) be used 
compared to a balanced hypoenergetic diet?
Physical activity En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se deben 
usar intervenciones destinadas a controlar conductas sedentarias 
en comparación con no usarlas?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
interventions aimed at controlling sedentary behaviors be used 
versus not using them?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se deben 
realizar snacks de ejercicio en comparación con no realizarlos?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
exercise snacks be used compared to not using them?
Behavioral interventions and mental health En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
realizar tamizaje de salud mental en atención primaria en compar-
ación con no realizarlo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
mental health screening be performed in primary care compared to 
not screening?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se deben 
usar herramientas conductuales en comparación con no utilizarlas?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
behavioral change tools be used versus not using them?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se deben 
usar intervenciones psicológicas grupales en comparación con 
intervenciones psicológicas individualizadas?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
group psychological interventions be used compared to individual-
ized psychological interventions?
Pharmaco-therapy En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar fentermina por 6 meses o más en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
phentermine be used for six months or longer compared to lifestyle/
placebo interventions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar fenproporex por 6 meses o más en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
fenproporex be used for six months or longer compared to lifestyle/
placebo interventions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar mazindol por 6 meses o más en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
mazindol be used for six months or longer compared to lifestyle/
placebo interventions?
648 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Table 2  (continued)
Key Topic Clinical Challenge Research Question (Spanish) Research Question (English Translation)*
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar anfepramona por 6 meses o más en comparación con inter-
venciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
amfepramone be used for six months or longer compared to life-
style/placebo interventions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar clobenzorex por 6 meses o más en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
clobenzorex be used for six months or longer compared to lifestyle/
placebo interventions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad sin diabetes, 
¿se deben usar agonistas del péptido similar al glucagon tipo 1 
(GLP-1) (liraglutida, semaglutida) en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity without 
diabetes, should glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) agonists (liraglu-
tide, semaglutide) be used compared to lifestyle/placebo interven-
tions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad sin diabetes, 
¿se debe usar naltrexona/bupropion en comparación con interven-
ciones en el estilo de vida/placebo?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity without 
diabetes, should naltrexone/bupropion be used compared to lifestyle/
placebo interventions?
En adultos de 18 años o más con obesidad Índice de masa corporal 
(IMC > 30), ¿se debe fenotipificar la farmacoterapia para obesidad 
en comparación con la prescripción convencional?
In adults aged 18 years or older with obesity (BMI > 30), should phar-
macotherapy for obesity be phenotyped compared to conventional 
prescribing?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad, ¿se debe 
usar terapia combinada de fármacos para obesidad (liraglutida, 
semaglutida, naltrexona/bupropion, orlistat) en comparación con 
monoterapia de fármacos para obesidad?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity, should 
combination obesity drug therapy (liraglutide, semaglutide, naltrex-
one/bupropion) be used compared to obesity drug monotherapy?
En adultos de 18 años o más con sobrepeso u obesidad sin altera-
ciones del metabolismo de la glucosa, ¿se deben usar antidia-
béticos orales (inhibidores del cotransportador sodio-glucosa 
[iSGLT2] o metformina) en comparación con intervenciones en el 
estilo de vida?
In adults 18 years of age or older with overweight or obesity without 
impaired glucose metabolism, should oral hypoglycemic agents 
(Na + -glucose cotransporter 2 [iSGLT2] inhibitors or metformin) be 
used compared to lifestyle interventions?
* PICO questions were developed and processed in Spanish; English translations provided here are edited slightly for clarity for English readers
** The use of the term “primary care” in the literature often refers specifically to the primary healthcare setting, and so the authors have adopted that language when crafting the PICO questions, 
recommendations, and good practice statements
649Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
of systematic reviews, PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, 
CINAHL, PsycINFO, LILACS, DARE, HTA database, 
Campbell database, JBI database of systematic reviews and 
implementation reports, and EPPI-Center Evidence Library) 
[41].
No date or language restrictions were applied. To iden-
tify primary studies not included in the reviews, additional 
searches restricted to the previous three years were per -
formed in PubMed and LILACS. The search strategies used 
for each clinical question are available in Supplementary 
File 1, Appendix 2. Duplicate records from the searches 
were identified by an automated process through the Epis-
temonikos Foundation database. Additionally, unpublished 
or ongoing studies mentioned in the systematic reviews were 
reviewed to see if there were updated publications for trials 
mentioned as ongoing in the systematic reviews.
Evidence was screened by independent peer reviewers in 
two stages (title and abstract, and full text) using the Collab-
oratron screening software developed by the Epistemonikos 
Foundation [41]. Discrepancies were resolved by consensus 
or by a third investigator.
After the selection process, evidence matrices were con-
structed with the aim of comparing the studies included in 
the systematic reviews and identifying the most exhaustive, 
updated, and best quality ones. When a review was identi-
fied meeting these characteristics, it was used directly to 
inform the corresponding clinical question; otherwise, a 
rapid review was performed including randomized trials 
[42]. When neither systematic reviews nor randomized tri-
als were identified, observational studies were considered.
Data extraction and risk of bias assessment were per -
formed by two reviewers using standardized forms. The 
RoB (risk of bias)-2 tool [43] was used to assess the risk of 
bias of randomized trials, and ROBINS-I (Risk Of Bias In 
Non-Randomised Studies—of Interventions) tool was used 
for observational studies [44].
The effects findings were synthesized quantitatively (i.e., 
through a meta-analysis) or narratively according to the 
available data. The GRADE approach was used to evaluate 
the certainty of the evidence. The certainty of the evidence 
was classified as high, moderate, low, and very low, consid-
ering the criteria of risk of bias, inconsistency, imprecision, 
indirect evidence, and publication bias. The results of the 
synthesis of the effects were integrated in the EtD tables 
through a summary of findings tables following the GRADE 
EtD framework [39]. For each question, EtD tables were cre-
ated through the interactive EtD (iEtD) platform [45]. EtD 
tables are available in Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.
To inform the criteria of importance of the outcomes, 
resource use, and considerations of equity, acceptability, 
and feasibility, we searched for systematic reviews of util-
ity studies, economic evaluations, and qualitative studies, 
respectively. When systematic reviews of qualitative studies 
were included, summary tables of qualitative findings were 
constructed based on data reported by the review authors, 
using the GRADE-CERQual (Confidence in the Evidence 
from Reviews of Qualitative research) approach [46, 47] 
and the iSoQ (Interactive Summary of Qualitative Findings) 
software [45]. Short messages were drafted to populate the 
corresponding EtD criteria.
Development of Recommendations
To develop the clinical recommendations based on the pri-
oritized PICO questions, an in-person workshop was held 
in June 2024. Each session was led by a member of the 
methodological team and a thematic expert. The panel was 
composed of clinical (healthcare professionals) and lived 
experience (patients) thematic experts. A presentation of the 
evidence for each question was made by a representative 
of the methodological team, while the moderation of the 
discussion and the recording of additional considerations 
was done jointly with the thematic expert assigned to the 
question. For each of the EtD framework criteria, thematic 
experts discussed and voted until consensus was reached. 
Consensus was defined a priori as an agreement of ≥ 75%. 
Up to three rounds of voting were conducted and, if no 
agreement was reached, the majority vote was chosen. After 
making judgments for each criterion, the panelists voted on 
the direction and strength of each recommendation. This 
entire process was conducted using the iEtD platform. Sup-
plementary File 1 contains the checklist and panel discus-
sion for developing each recommendation.
Formulating Good Practice Statements
Through the question prioritization process, 20 questions 
were identified by the expert panel and from other clinical 
practice guidelines [5, 8, 33] that met the criteria to be for -
mulated as good practice statements. These questions were 
structured as actionable statements and evaluated through 
a checklist that considered whether: i) the message is truly 
needed in relation to current clinical practice; ii) implement-
ing the statement results in a large net benefit (i.e., satisfies 
several EtD criteria) after considering all relevant outcomes 
and possible consequences; iii) in a context where time and 
resources are limited, conducting a formal process of sum-
marizing and discussing the evidence would not constitute 
a good use of time and/or resources; iv) there is a clear, 
explicit, and well-documented rationale connecting the indi-
rect evidence; and v) the statement is clear and actionable 
[48]. A structured online survey was conducted to determine 
agreement on the wording and supporting information of the 
good practice statements. Two online meetings were held to 
discuss and finalize the wording of those where consensus 
650 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
was not reached (proportion of agreement < 75%) or which 
had comments suggesting major changes. Supplementary 
File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discus-
sion for developing each good practice statement.
Recommendations and Good Practice 
Statements
Clinical Evaluation
Early diagnosis and treatment of overweight and obesity can 
improve overall health and quality of life as well as prevent 
and manage obesity-related complications [1 ]. However, 
healthcare professionals should be aware that people living 
with obesity may have experienced bias, stigma, and dis-
crimination because of their weight or obesity in many set-
tings, including healthcare settings [49]. These experiences 
may affect patients’ willingness to interact with healthcare 
professionals. Patients who have experienced weight bias 
and stigma may delay or avoid healthcare services for fear 
of being blamed and shamed for their weight. Therefore, 
obesity screening, assessment, diagnosis, treatment, and 
management need to be conducted using objective medical 
measures and non-judgmental, collaborative, and person-
centered approaches. Collaborative conversations, based on 
motivational interviewing, can include strategies such as: i) 
asking for permission to initiate a conversation about weight 
and obesity (“Is it okay for us to talk about your weight?”, 
“What worries you about your weight?”, “How can we work 
together to manage your obesity?”); ii) avoiding making 
assumptions about patients’ lifestyles, health behaviours, 
interests, motivations, or stage of change; iii) listening to 
patients’ concerns and trying to understand patients’ points 
of view; iv) validating and respecting patients’ situations 
and experiences; v) supporting patients to make choices, 
adapt, and sustain evidence-based behaviors associated with 
obesity management; vi) exchanging ideas about alterna-
tive options to address obesity management barriers; vii) 
establishing an action plan together; and viii) acknowledg-
ing that behavior change is difficult while recognizing small 
changes [50].
Obesity is an adiposity-based chronic disease and the 
goal of a medical obesity assessment is to determine how 
excess or dysfunctional adiposity impacts a person’s health 
and well-being. Anthropometric measures, such as BMI or 
waist circumference, can be used as screening tools, but 
relying solely on anthropometric measures for the screen-
ing and diagnosis of obesity can lead to both underdiag-
nosis and overdiagnosis of obesity [13, 51]. To diagnose 
obesity, existing international guidelines recommend a full 
medical assessment to determine if and how excess adipos-
ity or pathogenic changes in adipose tissue are impacting a 
person’s health and well-being [5, 8, 13, 33, 51, 52]. A medi-
cal obesity assessment can consider the impact of obesity on 
cardiometabolic health, physical functioning, and psycho-
social outcomes [5 , 8, 13]. With a more accurate diagno-
sis and staging of obesity and its complications, healthcare 
professionals can work collaboratively with patients living 
with obesity to develop personalized, targeted, and effective 
obesity treatment and management approaches [52]. Accu-
rate diagnosis of obesity can also facilitate the allocation 
of healthcare resources so that patients who need treatment 
have access to effective and evidence-based treatments.
Cardiovascular diseases are among the most significant 
obesity-related impacts and the leading cause of mortal-
ity worldwide [ 53]. A staggering 17.7 million deaths in 
2015 were due to cardiovascular diseases, accounting for 
31% of global mortality. Research indicates that dysfunc-
tional adipose tissue and abnormal fat deposits in the myo-
cardium and epicardium lead to the release of a series of 
metabolic signals, reactive oxygen species, prothrombotic, 
pro-inflammatory, and neurohormonal factors, resulting in 
endothelial dysfunction [53, 54]. Conducting a cardiovascu-
lar risk assessment in patients living with obesity is critically 
important and can inform effective clinical decision-mak -
ing. Patients who have a low cardiovascular risk assessment 
score can receive secondary prevention recommendations, 
while patients with a high cardiovascular risk score should 
receive evidence-based obesity and cardiovascular treat-
ments. Several scales and predictive models are available to 
assess cardiovascular risk in primary healthcare. However, 
there is some uncertainty regarding the potential impact on 
health outcomes and therapeutic approaches when using car-
diovascular risk scales in adults with overweight or obesity 
within primary care settings.
In women of reproductive age who wish to get pregnant, 
multidisciplinary obesity treatment before and during preg-
nancy have been demonstrated to have some benefit for both 
the mother and the offspring. There is some evidence that 
multidisciplinary lifestyle-based programs can also enhance 
certain fertility, maternal, and child health outcomes, com-
pared to conventional treatment [55].
This guideline includes evidence-based recommendations 
(Table  3) and consensus-based good practice statements 
(Table  4) for clinical evaluation.
Obesity Treatments
Effective and evidence-based obesity treatment interventions 
include behavioral interventions and psychological therapy, 
pharmacotherapy, and bariatric surgery and endoscopic 
procedures in conjunction with medical nutrition therapy 
and physical activity interventions [8 ]. Unfortunately, as in 
many countries, Mexican adults living with obesity often 
651Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
lack access to effective, evidence-based treatments and long-
term management support [36].
Global obesity clinical guidelines widely accept that 
creating individualized care plans (based on key princi-
ples of chronic disease management) that target the root 
causes and complications of obesity, delivered where 
possible by a multidisciplinary care team with exper -
tise in each treatment approach, and working towards 
improvements in health and well-being (not solely 
weight loss) and treatment goals identified in collabo-
ration with patients, may represent the highest standard 
of obesity care [13, 57].
Table 3  Recommendations: Clinical Evaluation*
 noitadnemmoceRnoitadnemmoceR
Strength and Direction
Certainty of 
Evidence
1. SMNE suggests using cardiovascular risk scoring tools to assess the 
cardiovascular risk at the primary care level in adults aged 18 years or 
older with overweight or obesity.
Remarks: Using the Globorisk scale[ 56], validated in the Mexican 
population, would be more appropriate for individuals over 40 years 
and/or those with comorbidities.
Conditional 
recommendation for the 
intervention
Very low
2. SMNE suggests referring women of reproductive age who wish to 
become pregnant and have pregestational obesity to a multidisciplinary 
program.
Conditional 
recommendation for the 
intervention
Very low
3. SMNE suggests referring adults aged 18 years or older with Class 2 
obesity, with or without comorbidities to a multidisciplinary program.
Remarks: In the context of limited resources, prioritization could be 
made according to the presence or absence of comorbidities for 
referral to centers of greater complexity (referral centers or national 
institutes of health).
Conditional 
recommendation for the 
intervention
Very low
* Supplementary File 1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for developing each recommendation
Table 4  Good Practice Statements (Ungraded): Clinical Evaluation*
* Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for each good practice statement
I) Healthcare professionals should examine, assess, and diagnose obesity using standardized measures that consider additional elements beyond 
weight, BMI, and waist circumference
II) Healthcare professionals should conduct a medical history aimed at identifying the causes of overweight or obesity in order to make appropriate 
therapeutic decisions and implement effective treatments
III) Healthcare professionals should assess and treat mechanical complications related to overweight or obesity, such as obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome, osteoarthritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, urinary incontinence, and plantar fasciitis, which may coexist with other complica-
tions
IV) Healthcare professionals should assess and treat cardiometabolic complications related to overweight or obesity, such as insulin resistance, 
prediabetes, T2D, dyslipidemia, metabolic syndrome, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), hypertension, and 
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases
V) Healthcare professionals should assess and treat mental health complications related to overweight or obesity, such as depressive symptoms, 
anxiety symptoms, and binge eating disorder
VI) Healthcare professionals should maintain a mutually collaborative relationship with patients with overweight or obesity to help them adopt 
evidence-based treatments and sustainable self-care behaviors associated with their treatment
VII) Healthcare professionals can consider using the "5As" framework (Ask, Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist) as part of the assessment, follow-up, 
and treatment of individuals with overweight or obesity
VIII) Healthcare professionals can consider implementing the Edmonton Obesity Staging System to integrate physical, metabolic, and mental 
health aspects in the diagnosis and treatment of obesity
652 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Multidisciplinary management approaches may improve 
obesity outcomes (e.g., weight loss, weight loss mainte-
nance, quality of life, etc.) and management of obesity-
related complications [58].
Medical Nutrition Therapy
Medical nutrition therapy is a central component of obe-
sity treatment, along with other critical elements, such as 
physical activity, exercise, sleep, and stress management. 
The consequences of a diet high in energy (calories) can 
negatively affect health in various ways, including prob-
lems related to gastrointestinal function (e.g., constipation, 
diarrhea, reflux, acid peptic disorders, etc.) and metabolic 
imbalance (e.g., hypertension, metabolic dysfunction-
associated steatotic liver disease, overweight, obesity, 
prediabetes, diabetes, dyslipidemia).
To ensure a safe, effective, culturally acceptable and 
sustainable approach it is critical to provide personalized 
nutritional recommendations for adults with overweight 
or obesity based on their personal characteristics, history, 
values, preferences, and treatment goals [59]. Medical 
nutrition therapy should ideally be provided by a certified 
nutritionist experienced in managing obesity who can pro-
vide evidence-based advice to maximize outcomes [59].
A dietary plan should be low in energy to effectively 
treat obesity and achieve improved weight or BMI out-
comes. Numerous studies have assessed various nutritional 
approaches for treating obesity, examining the wide vari-
ability in the composition of fat, protein, and carbohy -
drates, as well as varying levels of energy restriction and 
time restriction, among dietary approaches. These studies 
demonstrate that the effectiveness of different types of diet 
is variable in terms of achieved weight loss and meta-
bolic benefit [60– 62]. However, it is difficult to compare 
diets due to methodological and/or analytical differences, 
degrees of caloric restriction, degrees of adherence, meas-
urement errors, confounding variables, and other factors 
[63].
Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of clinical trials 
related to dietary interventions for overweight and obesity, 
usually show diverse results, although these differences are 
minor [64–67]. This leads to the conclusion that the effects 
of these interventions in the medium and long term do not 
justify the prescription of one diet over another. Currently, 
no single diet has been proven to be superior in treating 
people with obesity.
Thus, adults living with overweight or obesity can con-
sider any of the multiple medical nutrition therapies with 
scientific evidence to improve health-related outcomes, 
choosing food-based dietary patterns that allow for best 
long-term adherence [59]. It is important to clarify that, once 
this dietary plan is identified, it will not necessarily remain 
optimal throughout the patient's treatment since results may 
vary and personal circumstances may change. Therefore, 
health professionals and patients must be flexible and adapt 
the treatment according to the results of the periodic evalu-
ations carried out during follow-up.
Physical Activity
Accumulated time spent engaging in sedentary behaviors 
– defined as any activity of an awake individual, lying or 
reclining, that has an energy expenditure of less than 1.5 
metabolic units [68]– increases the risk of morbidity and 
mortality due to cardiovascular and metabolic causes. It also 
has a negative impact on musculoskeletal and psychological 
health, independent of other lifestyle factors [69–71].
Active breaks are a simple strategy to improve cardiovas-
cular and metabolic health and help offset the physiological 
effects of sedentary behaviors. Given the ease of accessibil-
ity and performance of these simple activities, they can serve 
as an introduction to physical activity as a treatment tool for 
patients with chronic diseases [69–72]. These breaks do not 
require specialized sports equipment or specific intensity tar-
gets, and can involve simple activities such as walking at any 
speed, tiptoe rising, doing squats, etc. There is no consensus 
on the number of active breaks needed throughout the day.
Most people do not reach the minimum exercise rec-
ommendations suggested by the WHO to maintain health 
[73–77], with a lack of time commonly reported as a pri-
mary barrier. The concept of “exercise snacks” has there-
fore emerged as an option for individuals with limited time 
and for those whose work activity is predominantly sed-
entary [78, 79]. This approach centers on short bursts of 
exercise multiple times throughout the day involving mod-
erate to vigorous intensity with a duration of less than one 
minute, spaced at intervals between one to four hours [80, 
81]. Exercise snacks can be done with rhythmic, repetitive 
exercises that involve long muscles, such as climbing stairs, 
jumping jacks, and cycling, among others, or with strength 
exercises, such as squats, rowing, planks, etc., depending on 
specific objectives, health status, and level of physical fit-
ness [82–85]. Performing exercise snacks with a minimum 
frequency of three or more episodes during the day improves 
various aspects of health: cardiorespiratory capacity [86, 
87], muscle strength [84, 88–91], and cardiometabolic health 
[82, 92–94]
This guideline includes evidence-based recommendations 
(Table  5) and consensus-based good practice statements 
(Table  6) for medical nutrition therapy and physical activity 
interventions.
653Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
Behavioral and Mental Health Interventions
There is a complex and bidirectional relationship between 
obesity and mental health [95, 96]. It has been documented 
that people living with obesity have a higher prevalence 
of depression, anxiety, and stress. Depressive symptoms, 
anxiety, and stress can also drive to alterations in eating 
behaviors [96], which, combined with other factors (e.g., 
genetic, environmental, and biological), can lead to the 
development of obesity. Other factors that affect both men-
tal illness and obesity include inflammation, maladaptive 
coping mechanisms, and sociodemographic factors [97].
There is thus a need to consistently assess psychological 
and behavioral factors both at the onset and throughout the 
implementation of any obesity treatment. This is because 
psychological distress may also stem from deteriorating 
health, social stigma, and discrimination experienced by 
individuals living with obesity [98, 99].
Table 5  Recommendations: Medical Nutrition Therapy and Physical Activity*
* Supplementary File 1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for developing each recommendation
Table 6  Good Practice Statements (Ungraded): Medical Nutrition Therapy and Physical Activity*
* Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for each good practice statement
IX) Healthcare professionals should inform their patients about all evidence-based treatments for obesity, emphasizing that behavioral interventions 
focusing on nutrition and physical activity form the foundation of any treatment plan for individuals living with chronic diseases
X) Healthcare professionals should consider that nutritional and physical activity interventions are essential for health and well-being, but they 
may also require complementary therapies for the treatment of obesity
XI) Healthcare professionals should personalize dietary plans, prescribe physical activity and exercise, and tailor behavioral interventions for 
individuals with overweight or obesity
Remarks: The customization of treatments should be based on individual characteristics such as age, gender, genetics, metabolism, culture, 
family background, socioeconomic status, health status, sleep quality, stress, among other factors. This is due to the high heterogeneity of the 
disease (in terms of its causes, barriers to accessing care, phenotypes, and treatment responses)
XII) Healthcare professionals should individualize the prescription of physical activity according to the characteristics and preferences of people 
with overweight or obesity (cardiovascular risk, musculoskeletal conditions, and risk of falls), gradually increasing it to achieve WHO recom-
mendations for aerobic physical activity
Remarks: WHO recommendations include performing at least 150–300 min of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activity per week, or 
75–150 min of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity per week (or an equivalent combination)
XIII) In addition to prescribing aerobic physical activity, healthcare professionals should prescribe strength training at least two times per week 
to achieve additional physical and mental health benefits for individuals with overweight or obesity
Remarks: Strength training can be performed up to six times per week (as long as different muscle groups are used each time, allowing at least 
48 h of rest between sessions of each muscle group) and should consider daily life activities that involve strength and are suitable for treatment 
goals (e.g., maintaining muscle mass)
654 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Understanding patients’ personal history and trajectory of 
obesity development is crucial. This involves knowing when 
the weight gain began, what caused it, previous treatments, 
situations that led to weight changes, the impact on quality 
of life, and how the weight gaining pattern has evolved over 
time. A deeper understanding of each patient allows clini-
cians to create a personalized treatment plan [100].
In traditional obesity treatment paradigms, there has 
been an implicit assumption that obesity results from a 
lack of self-control (overeating), and that people can lose 
weight and keep it off simply by changing their eating “hab-
its”[101]. However, we now recognize the strong genetic 
influences on body weight and the complex neuroendocrine 
regulation of energy intake and expenditure, which often 
hinder long-term weight management efforts.
Psychological and behavioral interventions are integrated 
as key pillars of obesity management [5, 8, 33]. These inter-
ventions will not only support health behavior interventions 
(e.g., medical nutrition therapy and physical activity) and 
health behavior changes (e.g., medication adherence, self-
care strategies), but they will also generate a deeper under -
standing of the underlying reasons and conditions behind 
these behaviors. This includes considering thoughts, emo-
tions, attitudes, stages of change, motivation, expectations, 
barriers, and potential solutions.
Behavioral and psychological interventions can be used to 
educate patients that weight control is neither easy nor always 
comfortable, and to help them develop skills to achieve behav-
ioral change that will allow them to have a healthier life, reduce 
stress, have better tools to face their environment, increase psy-
chological flexibility, promote acceptance of internal experi-
ences, tolerate frustration, improve their quality of life, and 
promote sustainable self-care in the short and long term [102, 
103]. Effective and collaborative conversations with patients 
using motivational interviewing strategies support changes 
toward a health behavior change, which is essential for living 
with and managing chronic diseases, including obesity [50].
These psychological interventions, when used in con-
junction with the rest of the obesity management strategies, 
move from simply inducing weight loss (through caloric 
restriction) to facilitating patients to adopt patterns of eating 
and physical activity and medical adherence that promote 
optimal changes in body composition and overall health 
[102, 103].
Table 7  Recommendations: Behavioral and Mental Health Interventions*
Recommendation Recommendation 
Strength and Direction
Certainty of 
Evidence
* Supplementary File 1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for developing each recommendation
Table 8  Good Practice Statements (Ungraded): Behavioral and Mental Health Interventions*
* Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for each good practice statement
XIV) Healthcare professionals should consider elements of motivational interviewing to build a collaborative relationship with their patients 
with overweight or obesity. This approach helps patients explore readiness and reasons for change, increase self-esteem, and enhance self-
efficacy
XV) Healthcare professionals should discuss with patients the therapeutic goals related to weight loss, management of comorbidities, well-being, 
and quality of life, without conveying the notion of an "ideal" weight, and instead talking about a "best weight."
655Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
This guideline includes evidence-based recommendations 
(Table  7) and consensus-based good practice statements 
(Table  8) for behavioral and mental health interventions.
Pharmacotherapy
There is a widespread belief among both patients, health 
professionals, and healthcare policymakers that a lack of 
adherence to lifestyle changes is the main barrier to manag-
ing overweight and obesity [36]. However, in many cases, 
medical nutrition therapy and physical activity interventions 
on their own do not achieve long-term sustainable improve-
ments in overweight and obesity (which, it is important to 
stress, may or may not involve weight loss) given the multi-
factorial etiology and heterogeneity of the disease. Multiple 
interventions, including medical nutrition therapy, physical 
activity, psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and bariatric sur-
gery, may be necessary to address the complex physiological 
mechanisms of weight gain and improve health outcomes 
[104]. Thus, pharmacological treatments are recommended 
for patients undergoing behavioral interventions who have a 
BMI ≥  30 kg/m 2 or for patients with a BMI ≥  27 kg/m 2 with 
at least one comorbidity associated with excess adiposity 
[105]. Despite eligibility and safety of current obesity medi-
cations, there are many access barriers to these treatments, 
and less than 2.0% of patients living with obesity receive 
pharmacological treatment [106].
Multiple pharmacological agents have emerged with 
potential utility for the treatment of overweight and obe-
sity. Safe and effective long-term medications are avail-
able in Mexico that can achieve a reduction of 5%–14% of 
total body weight (semaglutide, liraglutide, combination of 
naltrexone with bupropion, and orlistat). In addition, these 
treatments may offer benefits in terms of improvement in 
obesity-related complications and comorbidities independ-
ent of weight loss [105].
Pharmacotherapy should be individualized based on 
patients’ specific conditions, obesity complications, and 
comorbidities, as well as safety considerations specified in 
Fig.  1. All approved medications for treating obesity are con-
traindicated during pregnancy. Following obesity treatment, 
there is an increased likelihood of pregnancy, necessitating 
Fig. 1  Individualization of 
Long-Term Pharmacotherapy 
Using Agents Approved in Mex-
ico. Abbreviations: T.i.d. = three 
times a day, B.i.d. = two 
times a day, Q.d. = once a 
day, MAFLD = metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatotic 
liver disease, CAD = car-
diovascular arterial disease, 
CKD = chronic kidney dis-
ease, mild (50–79 mL/min), 
moderate (30–49 mL/min), 
RD = retinopathy-diabetic, 
SBP = surveillance blood 
pressure, UH = uncontrolled 
hypertension, MHR = moni-
tor heart rate, AD = adjusted 
doses, APOS = avoid previous 
oxalate stones, MS = monitor 
symptoms, APD = avoid if prior 
disease, A = avoid, CR = con-
troversial results, LSU = lower 
seizure umbral, AO = antago-
nize opioids, ARD = avoid if 
prior RD, MTAC = may trigger 
angle closure
Semaglutide
Liraglutide
Naltrexone / Bupropion
Orlistat
16 mg/180 mg b.i.d.
3.0 mg q.d.
2.4 mg/week
120 mg t.i.d.
ModerateCKD
Pregnancy
Hypertension
CAD
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
MildCKD
Nephrolithiasis
Cholelithiasis
Pancreatitis
Type 2 diabetes
Prediabetes
Post-bariatric
surgery
Retinopathy
Glaucoma
Age > 65 years
Smoking
Alcoholism
Opioiduse
Seizuredisorder
Emotionaleating
Bingeeating
Depression
MAFLD
Long-term
Pharmacotherapy
M
S
MHR
AD
APOS
MHR MHR
MTAC
AO
LSU
ARD
CR
CR
M
S
M
S
APD
SBPUH
C
C
C
C
LSU
APD
Cardiom
etabolic
Kidney
GastrointestinaI
Neuropsychiatric
Ophthalm
ic
Miscellaneous
Safe to use in most patients
Use with caution and surveillance
Avoid
656 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Table 9  Recommendations: Pharmacotherapy*
* Supplementary File 1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for developing each recommendation
** Additional panel considerations: The expert panel considered that the balance of effects, as well as equity and acceptability considerations, 
657Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
careful monitoring and guidance for women of childbear -
ing age.
It is important to note that in Mexico, some obesity medi-
cations are still prescribed despite lacking robust scientific 
evidence for their long-term efficacy and safety. Therefore, 
it is crucial for healthcare professionals who are the first 
point of contact for patients living with obesity and who 
wish to prescribe pharmacological interventions to carefully 
consider an agent’s effectiveness and safety.
This guideline includes evidence-based recommendations 
(Table  9) and consensus-based good practice statements 
(Table  10) for pharmacotherapy interventions.
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery
Metabolic and bariatric surgery (MBS) is one of the key 
pillars of obesity treatments and should be considered for 
individuals living with obesity, severe obesity, and obesity-
related complications. MBS, encompassing procedures such 
as gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy, plays a crucial role 
in the treatment of severe obesity [5, 8, 33, 109]. Indications 
for MBS include a BMI ≥ 35 kg/m 2, or BMI 30–34.9 kg/
m2 with type 2 diabetes (T2D), or patients with suboptimal 
treatment response, recurrent weight gain, or without co-
morbidity improvement using non-surgical methods [109].
  The benefits of MBS extend beyond significant and sus-
tained medically necessary weight loss. MBS can also lead to 
improvements in or resolution of obesity complications, such as 
T2D, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, sleep apnea, and MAFLD, 
and reduces the risk of some malignant tumors, acute cerebro-
vascular events, and all-cause mortality [110]. MBS-induced 
weight loss also enhances quality of life and increases longevity.
Long-term benefits and outcomes of MBS, like all other 
obesity treatments, are strongly related adherence to adjunctive 
interventions (such as medical nutrition therapy and physical 
activity, psychological and behavioral interventions), genetics, 
and other environmental and social factors. Although MBS has 
been shown to produce significant long-term weight loss and 
manage or resolve obesity-related complications, 20%–30% of 
patients may still experience suboptimal clinical response (i.e., 
total weight loss of less than 20% or inadequate improvements 
in significant obesity complications) or recurrent weight gain 
(i.e., more than 20% of the initial surgical weight loss or wors-
ening of an obesity complication that was a significant indi-
cation for surgery) after MBS, due to the biological, chronic, 
progressive, and relapsing nature of obesity [111–113].
Potential MBS risks and complications include surgical com-
plications and nutritional deficiencies, among others. Therefore, 
bariatric surgery needs to be performed by specialized surgeons 
in hospitals with dedicated multidisciplinary teams that can pro-
vide lifelong medical follow-up and support [109].
If MBS is indicated for T2D remission, an accurate diag-
nosis of diabetes type and related complications, as well as 
information about the level of pancreatic insulin secretory 
reserve, is particularly important. This information is ben-
eficial in assessing the likelihood of diabetes remission after 
favor the use of phentermine for 6 months or more in most patients. Given the low cost and wide availability of the agent, it may be especially 
useful for patients with lower income and those who lack access to the newer, costlier medications. The panel also considered that it is pos-
sible that adverse events have not occurred in phentermine clinical trials due to the low number of participants, reduced follow-up time and a 
lack of cardiovascular safety studies. The panel submitted two additional studies for discussion in the Mexican context. An observational study 
of 166 participants found that, among patients receiving phentermine for 6 months, 92.9% of adverse events were mainly mild [107]. Another 
study evaluating the effectiveness and safety of phentermine in nearly 14,000 individuals suggested that prolonged use of the medication 
(> 12 months) does not significantly increase the likelihood of major cardiovascular events at 24 months [108]. Based on the panel's collective 
clinical experience, phentermine can produce non-serious adverse events frequently observed in clinical practice; however, in some subgroups of 
patients more caution should be exercised. These include individuals with anxiety disorders and depression, those taking antidepressants due to 
drug interactions, and others at higher risk for adverse events (older adults, those at risk of cardiovascular disease and those at risk for glaucoma)
Table 9  (continued)
Table 10  Good Practice Statements (Ungraded): Pharmacotherapy*
* Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for each good practice statement
XVI) Healthcare professionals prescribing pharmacotherapy for overweight and obesity should consider it as an adjunct treatment to behavioral 
interventions involving medical nutrition therapy and physical activity, stress management, etc. and it should never be prescribed as a stand-
alone treatment
XVII) Healthcare professionals prescribing pharmacotherapy should consider it for patients who have overweight (BMI ≥ 27 kg/m 2) with related 
adiposity-related comorbidities, or for patients with obesity (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2), in conjunction with nutritional counseling, psychological sup-
port, and physical activity prescription
XVIII) Healthcare professionals prescribing pharmacotherapy as an adjunct for the treatment of obesity should consider medications approved 
by the Mexican national regulatory agency (COFEPRIS) and for long-term follow-up
658 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
MBS. Preoperative evaluation in some patients may include 
tests to distinguish type 1 diabetes from T2D, such as fast-
ing C-peptide and anti-GAD (glutamic acid decarboxylase) 
or other autoantibodies [114]. A preoperative evaluation may 
also include prediction scales to identify patients who may 
benefit from MBS. Among the existing prediction scales are 
the DiaRem, Ad-DiaRem, ABCD, DRS, and 5y-Ad-DiaRem 
scales, which assess several parameters such as age, glycated 
hemoglobin, duration of diabetes, pancreatic reserves, insulin 
use, among other factors [115–117].
This guideline includes consensus-based good practice 
statements (Table  11) for metabolic and bariatric surgery 
interventions.
Conclusion
Implementing clinical practice guidelines for overweight and 
obesity is crucial for enhancing the quality and consistency 
of patient care. This guideline, developed through rigorous 
research and expert consensus, provides healthcare profes-
sionals with evidence-based recommendations to enhance 
collaborative clinical decisions. By informing the standardi-
zation of obesity care practices, this guideline can help reduce 
variability in treatment approaches across populations and 
regions, ensuring patients living with obesity receive the most 
effective, safe, and personalized interventions. This can lead 
to improved patient outcomes, reduced health inequalities, and 
more efficient use of healthcare resources. Additionally, adher-
ence to clinical practice guidelines supports continuous quality 
improvement and facilitates better communication and coor-
dination among healthcare teams, ultimately contributing to 
a more reliable and patient-centered healthcare system [118].
SMNE is committed to working with interdisciplinary 
healthcare professional societies, patient advocacy groups, 
and healthcare decision makers to disseminate and implement 
this guideline. This guideline was conceived as a founda-
tional first step to righting historical wrongs for patients in 
Mexico, and as an objective and evidence-informed guide 
for healthcare practitioners to provide meaningful obesity 
care, in line with the latest thinking found in recent interna-
tional clinical guidelines. Facilitating access to obesity care 
in Mexico is a critical tool for prevention of the harm that 
obesity can do to the health of the population. However, the 
publication of clinical practice guidelines alone is insufficient 
to bring about fundamental change. Without a comprehensive 
national obesity care strategy encompassing i) meaningful 
healthcare professional training in obesity management, ii) 
supportive policies and funding at all relevant levels of gov-
ernment and within health systems that remove barriers to 
care and facilitate equitable, timely, and affordable access to 
evidence-based treatments, iii) widespread efforts to reduce 
weight bias and discrimination, and iv) programs to promote 
more wide-spread awareness among the public about the 
drivers of and treatments for the disease, adults living with 
obesity in Mexico will continue to be underserved.
Key references
5. **Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, Garber AJ, 
Hurley DL, Jastreboff AM, Nadolsky K, Pessah-Pollack 
R, Plodkowski R (2016) AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 
OF CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS AND AMERI-
CAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY COMPRE-
HENSIVE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR 
MEDICAL CARE OF PATIENTS WITH OBESITY. 
Endocr Pract 22 Suppl 3:1–203
This clinical practice guideline provides medical rec-
ommendations for healthcare professionals in the 
management of obesity. This guideline informed many 
of the ungraded consensus-based good practice state-
ments in the Mexican clinical practice guideline.
7. *Bray GA, Kim KK, Wilding JPH, on behalf of the 
World Obesity Federation (2017) Obesity: a chronic 
relapsing progressive disease process. A position state-
ment of the World Obesity Federation: Position Paper. 
Obesity Reviews 18:715–723.
This paper summarizes global obesity expert consen-
sus that obesity should be treated as a chronic relaps-
ing chronic disease that requires evidence-based and 
long-term management. This informed the overall 
chronic disease management approach of the Mexican 
clinical practice guideline.
8. **Wharton S, Lau DCW, Vallis M, et al (2020) Obesity in 
adults: a clinical practice guideline. CMAJ 192: E875–E891.
Table 11  Good Practice Statements (Ungraded): Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery*
* Supplementary File 1, Appendix 3.1 contains the checklist and panel discussion for each good practice statement
XIX) Healthcare professionals should refer potentially eligible individuals for bariatric surgery to a specialized center that can provide multidis-
ciplinary treatment and long-term follow-up
Remarks: People with a BMI ≥ 40 kg/m 2 or BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2 with at least one adiposopathy-related disease are considered eligible for bariatric surgery
XX) Healthcare professionals should refer potentially eligible individuals for metabolic surgery to a specialized center that can provide multidis-
ciplinary treatment and long-term follow-up
Remarks: People with a BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 and T2D that could potentially go into remission are considered eligible for metabolic surgery
659Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
This clinical practice guideline provides clinical rec-
ommendations for the management of obesity using 
non-stigmatizing, patient-centred, and evidence-based 
approaches. This guideline informed many of the 
ungraded consensus-based good practice statements 
in the Mexican clinical practice guideline.
32. *Barquera S, Véjar-Rentería LS, Aguilar-Salinas C, 
et al (2022) Volviéndonos mejores: necesidad de acción 
inmediata ante el reto de la obesidad. Una postura de pro-
fesionales de la salud. Salud Publica Mex 64:225–229.
This paper outlines consensus-based recommenda -
tions for intersectoral actions for the prevention and 
management of obesity in Mexico. This paper includes 
a specific call for patient-centered actions to treat and 
manage obesity in Mexico.
33. **Durrer Schutz D, Busetto L, Dicker D, Farpour-Lambert 
N, Pryke R, Toplak H, Widmer D, Yumuk V, Schutz Y (2019) 
European Practical and Patient-Centred Guidelines for Adult 
Obesity Management in Primary Care. Obes Facts 12:40–66.
This clinical practice guideline provides practical clin-
ical recommendations for healthcare professionals in 
the context of primary care. This guideline informed 
many of the ungraded consensus- based good practice 
statements in the Mexican clinical practice guideline.
Appendix 1 Guideline Committee Members
Author list Discipline ORCID-ID email
Chair
Emma A. Chávez-Manzanera Endocrinologist 0000–0002-5530-965X emma.chavezm@incmnsz.mx 
Steering Committee
Leonor Mireles-Zavala Endocrinologist 0009–0002-9444–2418 dra.leonormireles80@gmail.com
Juan M. Vera-Zertuche Endocrinologist 0000–0001-9477–6851 drverazertuche@gmail.com
Raúl Calzada-León Endocrinologist 0000–0003-4253–4281 drraulcalzada@gmail.com
Martha Kaufer-Horwitz Nutritionist 0000–0003-3489–6899 marthakaufer@gmail.com
Hugo Laviada-Molina Endocrinologist 0000–0002-1061–3164 halm611031@hotmail.com
Rafael Violante-Ortíz Endocrinologist 0000–0002-2440–2915 dr.violante@gmail.com
Juan C. Garnica-Cuellar Endocrinologist 0000–0002-4520–3659 endocrinogarnica@gmail.com
Ricardo Hernández-González Endocrinologist 0000–0002-1523–0701 ricardoendocrino1@gmail.com
Eduardo García-García Endocrinologist 0000–0003-3881–0036 egarciaendocrino@gmail.com 
Fernando J. Lavalle-González Endocrinologist 0000–0001-8820–5366 fernando.lavalle@gmail.com
Leonardo Mancillas-Adame Endocrinologist 0000–0002-5556–7018 leomancillas@gmail.com
Juan C. López-Alvarenga Endocrinologist 0000–0002-0966–8766 jclalvar@gmail.com
Edith Vargas-Contreras Endocrinologist 0000–0002-6136–9691 edith_nibu@hotmail.com
Author list Discipline ORCID-ID email
Advisory Committee
Verónica Vázquez-Velázquez Psychologist 0000–0002-4050–0152 veronica.vazquezv@incmnsz.mx
Verónica Sánchez-Muñoz Sports Physician 0009–0003-9237–8392 verovoly@hotmail.com
José R. Flores-Lázaro Sports Physician 0009–0004-0829–4338 rolomd37@gmail.com
Eduardo W. Goicoechea-Turcott Internal Medicine 0009–0003-4369–5033 egoico@gmail.com
Eduardo Ramírez-Butanda Endocrinologist 0009–0005-3497-537X eduardo.ramirezb@incmnsz.mx
Juan F. Pérez-Hernández Nutritionist 0009–0004-1966–9051 fernando22ph@outlook.com
Reina R. Soriano-Cortés Nutritionist 0009–0005-2451–9389 rusoriano@gmail.com
Ma. Ángeles Vargas-Martínez Psychiatrist 0000–0003-2745–6449 avargasmartnez@gmail.com
Erika V. Soto-Fuentes Psychologist 0009–0000-8281–8372 valeria.sofu@gmail.com
Gerardo Magallanes-Díaz Physician 0009–0005-7494–7779 germagdi@gmail.com
Héctor Esquivias-Zavala Psychiatrist 0000–0002-5713–4582 esquivias.zavala@gmail.com
Miguel F. Herrera-Hernández Bariatric Surgeon 0000–0001-9187–9038 miguelfherrera@gmail.com
Simón Barquera-Cervera Epidemiologist 0000–0003-1854–4615 sbarquera@insp.mx
660 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Author list Discipline ORCID-ID email
Patient Committee
Morgan Salmon Patient Advocacy 0009–0005-9878–0125 salmonleguedemorgan@gmail.com
Cybele B. Díaz-Wionczek Patient Advocacy 0000–0002-3399–5361 cybele.diaz@gmail.com
Dinorah Ramírez-De Jesús Patient Advocacy 0009–0007-3568–9169 ramirezdinorah.2023@gmail.com
Juan P. Villaseñor-Díaz Patient Advocacy 0009–0007-3561-508X juanpivd@me.com
Replica Communications: Consultant
Ximena Ramos Salas Consultant 0000–0003-0549–8314 ximenars@gmail.com
Brad Hussey Consultant 0009–0008-6915–0599 brad.hussey@gmail.com
Epistemonikos Foundation: Health Research Methodologist
Javiera Peña Methodologist 0000–0002-0277–9922 jpena@epistemonikos.org
José Ramos-Rojas Methodologist 0000–0003-2337–4227 jramos@epistemonikos.org
Camila Ávila-Oliver Methodologist 0000–0001-5348–6284 cavila@epistemonikos.org
Gabriel Rada Methodologist 0000–0003-2435–0710 radagabriel@gmail.com
According to CRediT contribution roles taxonomy (https:// credit. niso. org/).
ICMJE, Defining the Role of Authors and Contributors (https:// www. icmje. org/ recom menda tions/ browse/ roles- and- respo nsibi lities/ defin ing- the- 
role- of- autho rs- and- contr ibuto rs. html)
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary 
material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13679- 024- 00585-w.
Acknowledgements We would like to express our gratitude to the Socie-
dad Mexicana de Nutrición y Endocrinología (SMNE) and its governing 
board members: Raquel N. Faradji-Hazán, Eduardo Márquez-Rodríguez, 
Juan C. Garnica-Cuellar, Juan E. García-García, Edith A. Vargas-Contre-
ras, and José A. Cetina-Canto for their invaluable support and resources 
provided in the development of this guideline. We also extend our thanks 
to the SMNE secretaries: Lorena Valdés-Trejo, Ángeles Miranda-Espe-
jel, and Lourdes Cortés-Medina for their administrative support. Special 
thanks to the Epistemonikos Foundation methods team: Francy Cantor-
Cruz, Psy. MSc., Valentina Veloso, DDS. M.Ed. PhD., Diana Biscay, 
Psy. MSc., Ana María Rojas-Gómez, DDS. MSc., Sebastián Pinto, DDS. 
MSc., Sergio Fernández, PT. MSc., Magdalena Bignon, DDS., and Paula 
Zambrano-Achig, DDS. for their contribution to the preliminary screening 
and data extraction of articles included in this guideline. We appreciate 
the work of Replica Communications, as well as Miguel A. Saquimux-
Contreras, Ph.D. candidate, and Yudith Preiss-Contreras, MD, for their 
conceptualization efforts. Lastly, we thank Víctor H. Tovar-Méndez and 
Arantxa M. Godoy-Blanca for their design of the pharmacotherapy figure.
Author contributions Chair: • Conceptualization: ECM formulated 
the overarching research goals and aims. • Funding acquisition: ECM 
arranged the acquisition of the financial support for the project leading 
to this publication. • Investigation: ECM conducted the investigation 
process. • Project administration: ECM performed the management 
and coordination responsibility for the research activity planning and 
execution. • Supervision: ECM oversaw the planning and execution 
of the GPC activities. • Visualization: ECM participated in creating, 
correcting, and visualizing the document for publication. • Writing 
(original draft): ECM participated in the creation of the initial draft of 
the writing. • Writing (review and editing): ECM reviewed the drafts 
and approved the final version of this manuscript.
 Steering committee team:  • Conceptualization: LMZ, RCL, JVZ, 
MKH, EGG, HLM, RVO, JGC, RHG, FLG, LMA, JLA, and EVG 
formulated the overarching research goals and aims. • Visualization: 
LMZ, RCL, JVZ, MKH, EGG, HLM, RVO, JGC, RHG, FLG, LMA, 
JLA, and EVG participated in creating, correcting, and visualizing the 
document for publication. • Writing (original draft): JVZ, MK, LMM, 
EGC, RCL participated in the creation of the initial draft of the writ-
ing. • Writing (review and editing): all authors reviewed the drafts and 
approved the final version of this manuscript.
 Advisory committee team: • Conceptualization: VVV, JFL, VSM, 
SMC, MHH, HEZ, ERM, JPH, EGT, RSC, MVM, and ESF formulated 
the overarching research goals and aims. • Visualization: VVV, JFL, 
VSM, SMC, MHH, HEZ, ERM, JPH, EGT, RSC, MVM, and ESF 
participated in creating, correcting, and visualizing the document for 
publication. • Writing (original draft): VVV, JFL, VSM, SBC, and 
MHH participated in the creation of the initial draft of the writing. 
• Writing (review and editing): all authors reviewed the drafts and 
approved the final version of this manuscript.
 Patient committee team: • Investigation: MS, CDW, DRD, and 
JVD conducted the investigation process. • Visualization: MS, CDW, 
DRD, and JVD participated in creating, correcting, and visualizing 
the document for publication. • Writing (review and editing): all 
authors reviewed the drafts and approved the final version of this 
manuscript.
 Epistemonikos Foundation methods team: • Conceptualization: GR, 
CA, JP, and JR formulated the overarching research goals and aims. • 
Methodology: GR, CA, JP, and JR developed the methods for evidence 
synthesis. • Investigation: JP and JR performed the article screening, 
extracted data, assessed the risk of bias of the included studies, evalu-
ated the certainty of evidence, and prepared the summary of findings 
and evidence to decision tables. JP and JR chaired the panel discussion, 
drafted, and approved the recommendations and good practice state-
ments. • Project administration: JP and JR coordinated the research 
activities planning and execution. • Writing (original draft): JP and JR 
wrote the first draft with input from CA and GR. • Writing (review and 
editing): all authors reviewed the drafts and approved the final version 
of this manuscript.
 Replica Communications team: • Conceptualization: XRS and BH 
formulated the overarching research goals and aims. • Investigation: 
XRS and BH conducted the investigation process. • Supervision: XRS 
and BH oversaw the planning and execution of the CPG activities. • 
Visualization: XRS and BH participated in creating, correcting, and 
visualizing the document for publication. • Writing (original draft): 
XRS and BH participated in the creation of the initial draft of the writ-
ing. • Writing (review and editing): all authors reviewed the drafts and 
approved the final version of this manuscript.
661Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
Funding Sociedad Mexicana de Nutrición y Endocrinología
Data Availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the 
current study.
Declarations 
Competing Interests ECM. reports honoraria for lectures, presentations, 
and educational events from Novo Nordisk, Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
and Silanes; advisory board honoraria from Abbott, Eli Lilly and Merck; 
support for attending medical congresses from Merck and Boehringer 
Ingelheim; and leadership roles as chair of the Obesity Task Force at the 
Sociedad Mexicana de Nutrición y Endocrinología (SMNE) 2022-2024 
and as a member at-large representing Mexico in The Obesity Society 
(TOS) 2024-2026. JVZ reports honoraria for lectures, presentations, and 
educational events from Novo Nordisk, Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Exeltis, Abbot and Astra Zeneca; support for attending medical congress 
from Novo Nordisk; and advisory board honoraria from Abbott, Bayer, 
and Novo Nordisk. MKH reports royalties for the textbook Nutriología 
Médica (Editorial Médica Panamericana), 4th and  5th editions; leader-
ship roles as an editor of Cuadernos de Nutrición; and as a member of the 
Research Ethics Committee at the Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médi-
cas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán and the Universidad Iberoamericana. 
VVV reports honoraria from the Grupo Mexicano para el Estudio de 
la Obesidad (Obesidades) including one honoraria sponsored by Novo 
Nordisk; consulting fees from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly; honoraria and 
travel support for lectures, presentations in conferences and educational 
events from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly; support for attending medical 
congress from Novo Nordisk; advisory board honoraria from Novo Nor-
disk and Eli Lilly; and leadership roles as chair of the Grupo Mexicano 
para el Estudio de la Obesidad (Obesidades). RFL reports honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, and educational events from Novo Nordisk and 
Abbott and support for attending medical congress from Novo Nord-
isk. LMZ reports honoraria for lectures, presentations, and educational 
events from Novo Nordisk, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Silanes; support 
for attending a medical congress from Novo Nordisk; and an advisory 
board honorarium from Novo Nordisk. JGC reports honoraria from Bayer 
and Novo Nordisk via Hospital Angeles Lindavista; honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, manuscript and educational events from Novo Nordisk, 
Astra Zeneca, AMGEN, Silanes, Bayer, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim 
and PTC Therapeutics; support for attending medical congress from 
Novo Nordisk, Boehringer Ingelheim and Astra Zeneca; and advisory 
board honoraria from Novo Nordisk, Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingel-
heim, Bayer, Novartis, AMGEN, Sanofi and PTC Therapeutics. VSM 
reports honoraria for lectures, presentations, and educational events from 
Novo Nordisk, Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Abbott, and support for 
attending medical congress from Abbott. ERM reports honoraria for lec-
tures, presentations, and educational events from Eli Lilly. RHG reports 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, and educational events from Silanes, 
and support for attending medical congress from Silanes, Sanfer and Car-
not. HLM reports honoraria from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly; honoraria 
for lectures, presentations, and educational events from Novo Nordisk, 
Eli Lilly and Abbott; and advisory board honoraria from Novo Nordisk 
and Eli Lilly.  HEZ reports consulting fees from Merck and Silanes, and 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, manuscripts and educational events 
from Merck and Senosiain. EGG reports honoraria for lectures, presenta-
tions, manuscript and educational events from Novo Nordisk and Merck, 
and support for attending a medical congress from Novo Nordisk. FLG 
reports consulting fees from Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Silanes, Astra Zen-
eca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck, Abbott and honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, manuscripts and educational events from Novo Nordisk, 
Eli Lilly, Silanes, Sanofi, Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck, 
Abbott. FLG reports support for attending meetings from Novo Nordisk 
and Abbott, and advisory board honoraria from Abbott, Merck, Eli Lilly, 
Sanofi, Silanes, Astra Zeneca, and Boehringer Ingelheim. LMA reports 
consulting fees from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly; honoraria for expert 
testimony from Novo Nordisk and Eli Lilly; honoraria for lectures, presen-
tations, manuscripts and educational events from Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, 
Opko, Sanofil; and advisory board honoraria from Opko and Avant Santé. 
JLA reports NIH grant paid through the Biggs Institute for Alzheimer’s 
and Neurodegenerative Diseases and the University of Texas Rio Grande 
Valley (UTRGV), Health and Human Service Commission grant paid 
through UTRGV and NIH/NIA grant paid through the University of Texas 
Health Science Center at San Antonio). VSF reports honorarium from 
Novo Nordisk, and leadership role as a member of Grupo Mexicano para 
el Estudio de la Obesidad (Obesidades). EGT reports support for attending 
medical congresses from Novo Nordisk. SBC reports support for attend-
ing medical congresses and lectures from the Federación Latinoamericana 
de Sociedades de Obesidad, Prince Mahidol Award and the Food and 
Agriculture Organization. EVG is an employee of the Sociedad Mexicana 
de Nutrición y Endocrinología. MS reports honorarium for expert testi-
mony from Novo Nordisk, and leadership role as a member of ABHíspalis 
Nacional and Alianza Hispano-Americana de Personas con Obesidad.
RCL, MVM, RVO, JPH, RSC, GMD, MHH, CDW, and DRJ have nothing 
to disclose. JP, JRR, CAO and GR are employees of Epistemonikos Foun-
dation. BH reports consulting fees from the Sociedad Mexicana de Nutri-
ción y Endocrinología (SMNE) on behalf of Replica Communications; 
grant support from Novo Nordisk (through Replica Communications); 
consulting fees for initiatives on behalf of Replica Communications from 
the World Health Organization, Obesity Canada, European Association 
for the Study of Obesity, European Council for People Living with Obe-
sity, the Chilean Society for Clinical Nutrition, Obesity and Metabolism, 
and the Consorci de Salut de Catalunya; travel support from the European 
Association for the Study of Obesity, GB Obesitas, and Bias 180; unpaid 
leadership role at Bias 180; and financial interests in 1919663 Ontario 
Inc and Replica Communications.  XRS reports consulting fees from the 
Sociedad Mexicana de Nutrición y Endocrinología (SMNE) on behalf 
of Replica Communications; grants from Novo Nordisk (through Rep-
lica Communications), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, and 
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (through various 
Canadian academic institutions); unpaid leadership and expert advisor 
roles at Bias 180, World Obesity Federation, International Federation for 
the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders; consulting fees from the 
World Health Organization, Obesity Canada, European Association for 
the Study of Obesity, European Council for People Living with Obesity, 
the Chilean Society for Clinical Nutrition, Obesity and Metabolism, and 
the Consorci de Salut de Catalunya; speaker honoraria and travel support 
from Blood Pressure Doctor, Canadian Cardiovascular Society, Consorci 
de Salut de Catalunya, Hospital Clinic Barcelona, and Globalport LLC.; 
Chilean Society for Clinical Nutrition, Obesity & Metabolism, Spanish 
Society of Bariatric Surgery, International Federation for the Surgery of 
Obesity, European Association for the Study of Obesity, GB Obesitas, 
Bias 180, European Coalition for People Living with Obesity and the 
Clínica de obesidad y trastornos de la conducta alimentaria; and financial 
interests in K&X Ramos AB and Replica Communications.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, 
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit 
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material 
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party 
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons 
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If 
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and 
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds 
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
662 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco 
mmons. org/ licen ses/ by- nc- nd/4. 0/.
References
 1. Mendoza-Herrera K, Pedroza-Tobías A, Hernández-Alcaraz C, 
Ávila-Burgos L, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Barquera S. Attributable bur-
den and expenditure of cardiovascular diseases and associated risk 
factors in Mexico and other selected mega-countries. Int J Environ 
Res Public Health. 2019. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijerp h1620 4041. 
 2. Campos-Nonato I, Galván-Valencia O, Hernández-Barrera L, 
Oviedo-Solís C, Barquera S. Prevalence of obesity and associ-
ated risk factors in Mexican adults: results of the Ensanut 2022. 
Salud Publica Mex. 2023;65:S238–47.
 3. World Health Organization. Health service delivery framework for 
prevention and management of obesity. (2023). https:// www. who. 
int/ news/ item/ 17- 05- 2023- new- WHO- frame work- avail able- for- 
preve ntion- and- manag ement- of- obesi ty. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 4. Mechanick JI, Garber AJ, Handelsman Y, Garvey WT. American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinologists’ position statement on 
obesity and obesity medicine. Endocr Pract. 2012;18:642–8.
 5. Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, Garber AJ, Hurley DL, 
Jastreboff AM, Nadolsky K, Pessah-Pollack R, Plodkowski R. 
American association of clinical endocrinologists and american 
college of endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice guide-
lines for medical care of patients with obesity. Endocr Pract. 
2016;22(Suppl 3):1–203.
 6. American Medical Association. Recognition of Obesity as a 
Disease H-440.842. In: AMA Policy Finder. (2013). https:// polic 
ysear ch. ama- assn. org/ polic yfind er/ detail/ obesi ty? uri=% 2FAMA 
Doc% 2FHOD. xml-0- 3858. xml. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 7. Bray GA, Kim KK, Wilding JPH, on behalf of the World Obe -
sity Federation. Obesity: a chronic relapsing progressive disease 
process. A position statement of the World Obesity Federation: 
Position Paper. Obesity Reviews. 2017;18:715–23.
 8. Wharton S, Lau DCW, Vallis M, et al. Obesity in adults: a clinical 
practice guideline. CMAJ. 2020;192:E875–91.
 9. Breen C, O’Connell J, Geoghegan J, et al. Obesity in adults: A 
2022 adapted clinical practice guideline for Ireland. Obes Facts. 
2022;15:736–52.
 10. Yumuk V, Tsigos C, Fried M, Schindler K, Busetto L, Micic 
D, Toplak H. European Guidelines for Obesity Management in 
Adults. Obes Facts. 2015;8:402–24.
 11. Federatie Medisch Specialisten. Guideline Overweight and obe-
sity in adults and children. In: Federatie Medisch Specialisten. 
(2023).  https:// richt lijne ndata base. nl/ richt lijn/ overg ewicht_ en_ 
obesi tas_ bij_ volwa ssenen_ en_ kinde ren/ start pagina_ richt lijn_ 
overg ewicht_ en_ obesi tas_ bij_ volwa ssenen_ en_ kinde ren. html. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 12. James WPT. WHO recognition of the global obesity epidemic. 
Int J Obes. 2008;32:S120–6.
 13. Busetto L, Dicker D, Frühbeck G, Halford JCG, Sbraccia P, 
Yumuk V, Goossens GH. A new framework for the diagnosis, 
staging and management of obesity in adults. Nat Med. 2024. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41591- 024- 03095-3.
 14. Dai H, Alsalhe TA, Chalghaf N, Riccò M, Bragazzi NL, Wu J. 
The global burden of disease attributable to high body mass index 
in 195 countries and territories, 1990–2017: An analysis of the 
Global Burden of Disease Study. PLoS Med. 2020;17: e1003198.
 15. National Institutes of Health NCI Cancers Associated with Over-
weight and Obesity. https:// www. cancer. gov/ espan ol/ cancer/ 
causas- preve ncion/ riesgo/ obesi dad/ cance res- asoci ados- sobre 
peso- infog rafia. Accessed 17 Jul 2024
 16. Montaño SA, Bastarrachea Sosa RA, Bourges Rodríguez H, et al. 
La obesidad en México: Posición de la Sociedad Mexicana de 
Nutrición y Endocrinología. Grupo para el Estudio y Tratami-
ento de la Obesidad. Revista de Endocrinología y Nutrición. 
2004;12:S80–7.
 17. Sarwer DB, Polonsky HM. The psychosocial burden of obesity. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2016;45:677–88.
 18. Sutin AR, Stephan Y, Terracciano A. Weight discrimination and 
risk of mortality. Psychol Sci. 2015;26:1803–11.
 19. World Obesity Federation. World Obesity Atlas 2024. London: 
World Obesity Federation, 2024. https:// data. world obesi ty. org/ 
publi catio ns/? cat= 22. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 20. Barquera S, Rivera JA. Obesity in Mexico: rapid epidemiologi-
cal transition and food industry interference in health policies. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020;8:746–7.
 21. OECD/The World Bank. Overweight and obese adults. In: Health 
at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean 2020, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 2020. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1787/ 13e27 1bc- en. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 22. Prospective Studies Collaboration. Body-mass index and cause-
specific mortality in 900 000 adults: collaborative analyses of 57 
prospective studies. The Lancet. 2009;373:1083–96.
 23. Neal K, Ullah S, Glastras SJ. Obesity class impacts adverse 
maternal and neonatal outcomes independent of diabetes. Front 
Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022;13: 832678.
 24. Ma RCW, Schmidt MI, Tam WH, McIntyre HD, Catalano PM. 
Clinical management of pregnancy in the obese mother: before 
conception, during pregnancy, and post-partum. Lancet Diabe-
tes Endocrinol. 2016;4:1037–49.
 25. Parrettini S, Caroli A, Torlone E. Nutrition and metabolic 
adaptations in physiological and complicated pregnancy: Focus 
on obesity and gestational diabetes. Front Endocrinol (Laus-
anne). 2020;11: 611929.
 26. Stevens DR, Neelon B, Roberts JR, Taylor SN, Newman RB, 
Vena JE, Hunt KJ. Mediation of the association between 
maternal pre-pregnancy overweight/obesity and childhood 
overweight/obesity by birth anthropometry. J Dev Orig Health 
Dis. 2021;12:71–8.
 27. Santos-Silva R, Fontoura M, Guimarães JT, Severo M, Barros 
H, Santos AC. Persistent weight gain between 0 and 4 years 
of age is associated with higher dehydroepiandrosterone sul-
phate levels at 7 years old: Data from the Generation XXI birth 
cohort. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2022;97:588–95.
 28. Baran J, Weres A, Czenczek-Lewandowska E, Leszczak J, 
Kalandyk-Osinko K, Łuszczki E, Sobek G, Mazur A. Excessive 
Gestational Weight Gain: Long-Term Consequences for the 
Child. J Clin Med. 2020. https://  doi. org/ 10. 3390/ jcm91 23795.
 29. Pugh SJ, Hutcheon JA, Richardson GA, Brooks MM, Himes 
KP, Day NL, Bodnar LM. Gestational weight gain, prepreg-
nancy body mass index and offspring attention-deficit hyper -
activity disorder symptoms and behaviour at age 10. BJOG. 
2016;123:2094–103.
 30. Freinkel N. Banting Lecture 1980. Of pregnancy and progeny. 
Diabetes. 1980;29:1023–35.
 31. Rivera JA, Colchero MA, Pérez-Ferrer C, Barquera S. Perspec-
tive: Mexico’s experience in building a toolkit for obesity and 
noncommunicable diseases prevention. Adv Nutr. 2024;15: 
100180.
 32. Barquera S, Véjar-Rentería LS, Aguilar-Salinas C, et  al. 
Volviéndonos mejores: necesidad de acción inmediata ante el 
reto de la obesidad. Una postura de profesionales de la salud. 
Salud Publica Mex. 2022;64:225–9.
 33. Durrer Schutz D, Busetto L, Dicker D, Farpour-Lambert 
N, Pryke R, Toplak H, Widmer D, Yumuk V, Schutz Y. 
663Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
European practical and patient-centred guidelines for 
adult obesity management in primary care. Obes Facts. 
2019;12:40–66.
 34. SEGOB. SUPLEMENTO del Programa Nacional de Infraes-
tructura de la Calidad 2023. 2023. https:// www. dof. gob. mx/  
nota_ detal le. php? codigo= 56907 32& fecha= 01/ 06/ 2023# gsc. 
tab=0. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 35. Estrada-Salgado LE, Kaufer-Horwitz M, Polo-Oteyza E, García-
García E. Knowledge of obesity in medical residency pro-
grams. Realities, reflections and proposals. Educación Médica. 
2021;22:147–56.
 36. Vázquez-Velázquez V, Laviada-Molina H, García-García E, San-
doval-Diez E, Mancillas-Adame L. Perceptions, Attitudes, and 
Barriers to Obesity Care in Mexico: Data From the ACTION-IO 
Study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2021;29:317–26.
 37. OECD. The heavy burden of obesity: the economics of preven-
tion. OECD Health Policy Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
2019. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1787/ 67450 d67- en. Accessed 15 Aug 
2024.
 38. Barquera S, Hernandez-Barrera L, Oviedo-Solis C, et al. Obe-
sidad en adultos. Salud pública de Mexico. 2024; Accepted July 
10, 2024.
 39 Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al. GRADE Evi-
dence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and transparent 
approach to making well informed healthcare choices.1: Introduc-
tion. BMJ. 2016;353:i2016.
 40. Franco JVA, Arancibia M, Meza N, Madrid E, Kopitowski K. Clinical 
practice guidelines: Concepts, limitations and challenges. Medwave. 
2020;20: e7887.
 41. Epistemonikos Foundation (2016) Collaboratron. https:// www. epist 
emoni kos. org/.
 42. Nussbaumer-Streit B, Sommer I, Hamel C, Devane D, Noel-Storr A, 
Puljak L, Trivella M, Gartlehner G. Rapid reviews methods series: 
Guidance on team considerations, study selection, data extraction 
and risk of bias assessment. BMJ Evid Based Med. 2023;28:418–23.
 43. Sterne JAC, Savović J, Page MJ, et al. RoB 2: a revised tool for assess-
ing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ. 2019;366: l4898.
 44. Sterne JA, Hernán MA, Reeves BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assess-
ing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions. BMJ. 
2016;355: i4919.
 45. GRADE-CERQual Interactive Summary of Qualitative Findings 
(iSoQ) [Computer program]. Version 1.0 accessed [insert date]. 
Oslo, Norway: Norwegian Institute of Public Health (developed by 
the Epistemonikos Foundation, Megan Wainwright Consulting and 
the Norwegian Institute of Public Health for the GRADE-CERQual 
Project Group). isoq. epist emoni kos. org. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 46. Lewin S, Booth A, Glenton C, et al. Applying GRADE-CERQual to 
qualitative evidence synthesis findings: introduction to the series. 
Implement Sci. 2018;13:2.
 47. Lewin S, Glenton C, Lawrie TA, Downe S, Finlayson KW, Rosenbaum 
S, Barreix M, Tunçalp Ö. Qualitative Evidence Synthesis (QES) for 
Guidelines: Paper 2 - Using qualitative evidence synthesis findings 
to inform evidence-to-decision frameworks and recommendations. 
Health Res Policy Syst. 2019;17:75.
 48. Dewidar O, Lotfi T, Langendam MW, et al. Good or best practice 
statements: proposal for the operationalisation and implementation 
of GRADE guidance. BMJ Evid Based Med. 2023;28:189–96.
 49 Kirk SFL, Ramos Salas X, Alberga AS, Russell-Mayhew S. Cana-
dian Adult Obesity Clinical Practice Guidelines: Reducing Weight 
Bias, Stigma and Discrimination in Obesity Management. Practice 
and Policy. Obesity Canada; 2020.
 50. Reims K, Ernst D. Using Motivational Interviewing to Promote 
Healthy Weight. Fam Pract Manag. 2016;23:32–8.
 51. Rueda-Clausen C, Poddar M, Lear S, Poirier P, Sharma AM. Cana-
dian adult obesity clinical practice guidelines: assessment of people 
living with obesity. https:// obesi tycan ada. ca/ guide lines/ asses sment. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 52. Kuk JL, Ardern CI, Church TS, Sharma AM, Padwal R, Sui X, Blair 
SN. Edmonton Obesity Staging System: association with weight his-
tory and mortality risk. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2011;36:570–6.
 53. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardio-
vascular disease: a scientific statement from the american heart 
association. Circulation. 2021;143:e984–1010.
 54. Volpe M, Gallo G. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: An execu-
tive document on pathophysiological and clinical links promoted 
by the Italian Society of Cardiovascular Prevention (SIPREC). 
Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023;10:1136340.
 55. Phelan S, Jelalian E, Coustan D, et al. Randomized controlled 
trial of prepregnancy lifestyle intervention to reduce recur -
rence of gestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2023;229(158):e1-158.e14.
 56. Carrillo-Larco RM, Stern D, Hambleton IR, et al. Derivation, 
internal validation, and recalibration of a cardiovascular risk 
score for Latin America and the Caribbean (Globorisk-LAC): 
A pooled analysis of cohort studies. Lancet Reg Health- 
Americas. 2022;9:100258. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lana. 2022. 
100258.
 57. Key obesity management principles. https:// easo. org/ cpg- imple 
menta tion/. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 58. Look AHEAD Research Group. Eight-year weight losses with an 
intensive lifestyle intervention: the look AHEAD study. Obesity 
(Silver Spring). 2014;22(1):5–13. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ oby. 
20662.
 59. Brown J, Clarke C, Johnson Stoklossa C, Sievenpiper J. Cana-
dian adult obesity clinical practice guidelines: medical nutri-
tion therapy in obesity management. https:// obesi tycan ada. ca/ 
guide lines/ nutri tion. Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 60. Jebb SA, Ahern AL, Olson AD, et al. Primary care referral to a 
commercial provider for weight loss treatment versus standard 
care: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011;378:1485–92.
 61. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al. Comparison of weight-
loss diets with different compositions of fat, protein, and car -
bohydrates. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:859–73.
 62. McManus K, Antinoro L, Sacks F. A randomized controlled 
trial of a moderate-fat, low-energy diet compared with a low 
fat, low-energy diet for weight loss in overweight adults. Int J 
Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2001;25:1503–11.
 63. Yannakoulia M, Scarmeas N. Diets. N Engl J Med. 
2024;390:2098–106.
 64. Smith ES, Smith HA, Betts JA, Gonzalez JT, Atkinson 
G. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Comparing 
Heterogeneity in Body Mass Responses Between Low-
Carbohydrate and Low-Fat Diets. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2020;28:1833–42.
 65. Dinu M, Pagliai G, Angelino D, et al. Effects of popular 
diets on anthropometric and cardiometabolic parameters: An 
umbrella review of meta-analyses of randomized controlled 
trials. Adv Nutr. 2020;11:815–33.
 66. Emadian A, Andrews RC, England CY, Wallace V, Thompson 
JL. The effect of macronutrients on glycaemic control: a sys-
tematic review of dietary randomised controlled trials in over -
weight and obese adults with type 2 diabetes in which there 
was no difference in weight loss between treatment groups. Br 
J Nutr. 2015;114:1656–66.
 67. Ge L, Sadeghirad B, Ball GDC, et al. Comparison of dietary 
macronutrient patterns of 14 popular named dietary pro -
grammes for weight and cardiovascular risk factor reduction 
in adults: systematic review and network meta-analysis of ran-
domised trials. BMJ. 2020;369:m696.
664 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
 68. Gibbs BB, Hergenroeder AL, Katzmarzyk PT, Lee I-M, Jakicic 
JM. Definition, measurement, and health risks associated with 
sedentary behavior. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47:1295–300.
 69. Carter S, Hartman Y, Holder S, Thijssen DH, Hopkins ND. 
Sedentary behavior and cardiovascular disease risk: mediating 
mechanisms. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2017;45:80–6.
 70. Katzmarzyk PT, Powell KE, Jakicic JM, Troiano RP, Piercy K, 
Tennant B. Sedentary Behavior and Health: Update from the 
2018 physical activity guidelines advisory committee. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 2019;51:1227–41.
 71. Lavie CJ, Ozemek C, Carbone S, Katzmarzyk PT, Blair SN. 
Sedentary behavior, exercise, and cardiovascular health. Circ 
Res. 2019;124:799–815.
 72. Pinto AJ, Bergouignan A, Dempsey PC, Roschel H, Owen N, 
Gualano B, Dunstan DW. Physiology of sedentary behavior. 
Physiol Rev. 2023;103:2561–622.
 73. Zavala GA, Ainscough TS, Jimenez-Moreno AC. Barriers to 
a healthy diet and physical activity in Mexican adults: results 
from the Mexican Health and Nutrition Survey. Nutr Bull. 
2022;47:298–306.
 74. INEGI. Módulo de práctica deportiva y ejercicio físico 
(MOPRADEF). Comunicado de prensa núm. 34/23. 26 de 
enero de 2023. 2022. https:// www. inegi. org. mx/ conte nidos/  
salad epren sa/ bolet ines/ 2023/ mopra def/ mopra def20 22. pdf. 
Accessed 15 Aug 2024.
 75. Bull FC, Al-Ansari SS, Biddle S, et al. World Health Organiza-
tion 2020 guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behav -
iour. Br J Sports Med. 2020;54:1451–62.
 76. Global action plan on physical activity 2018–2030: more active 
people for a healthier world. Geneva: World Health Organiza-
tion; 2018. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. Accessed 15 Aug 
2024.
 77. Hoare E, Stavreski B, Jennings GL, Kingwell BA. Exploring 
motivation and barriers to physical activity among active and 
inactive Australian adults. Sports (Basel). 2017. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 3390/ sport s5030 047.
 78. Safi A, Cole M, Kelly AL, Zariwala MG, Walker NC. Workplace 
physical activity barriers and facilitators: A qualitative study 
based on employees physical activity levels. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2022. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijerp h1915 9442.
 79. Yin M, Deng S, Chen Z, et al. Exercise snacks are a time-efficient 
alternative to moderate-intensity continuous training for improv-
ing cardiorespiratory fitness but not maximal fat oxidation in 
inactive adults: a randomized controlled trial. Appl Physiol Nutr 
Metab. 2024;49:920–32.
 80. Islam H, Gibala MJ, Little JP. Exercise Snacks: A Novel Strat -
egy to Improve Cardiometabolic Health. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 
2022;50:31–7.
 81. Wang T, Laher I, Li S. Exercise snacks and physical fitness in 
sedentary populations. Sports Med Health Sci. 2024. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. smhs. 2024. 02. 006.
 82. Rafiei H, Omidian K, Myette-Côté É, Little JP. Metabolic effect 
of breaking up prolonged sitting with stair climbing exercise 
snacks. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2021;53:150–8.
 83. Kowalsky RJ, Farney TM, Hearon CM. Resistance exercise 
breaks improve ratings of discomfort and sleepiness in college 
students. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2023;94:210–5.
 84. Perkin OJ, McGuigan PM, Stokes KA. Exercise snacking to 
improve muscle function in healthy older adults: a pilot study. J 
Aging Res. 2019;2019:7516939.
 85. Jansons P, Fyfe JJ, Dalla Via J, Daly RM, Scott D. Barriers and 
enablers associated with participation in a home-based pragmatic 
exercise snacking program in older adults delivered and moni-
tored by Amazon Alexa: a qualitative study. Aging Clin Exp Res. 
2023;35:561–9.
 86. Little JP, Langley J, Lee M, Myette-Côté E, Jackson G, Durrer C, 
Gibala MJ, Jung ME. Sprint exercise snacks: a novel approach to 
increase aerobic fitness. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2019;119:1203–12.
 87. Jenkins EM, Nairn LN, Skelly LE, Little JP, Gibala MJ. Do stair 
climbing exercise “snacks” improve cardiorespiratory fitness? 
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2019;44:681–4.
 88. Nuzzo JL, Pinto MD, Kirk BJC, Nosaka K. Resistance exercise 
minimal dose strategies for increasing muscle strength in the 
general population: an Overview. Sports Med. 2024;54:1139–62.
 89. Fyfe JJ, Dalla Via J, Jansons P, Scott D, Daly RM. Feasibility 
and acceptability of a remotely delivered, home-based, pragmatic 
resistance “exercise snacking” intervention in community-dwell-
ing older adults: a pilot randomised controlled trial. BMC Geri-
atr. 2022;22:521.
 90. Liang IJ, Perkin OJ, McGuigan PM, Thompson D, Western MJ. 
Feasibility and acceptability of home-based exercise snacking 
and Tai Chi snacking delivered remotely to self-isolating older 
adults during COVID-19. J Aging Phys Act. 2022;30:33–43.
 91. Brandt T, Schwandner CTL, Schmidt A. Resistance exercise 
snacks improve muscle mass in female university employees: 
a prospective, controlled, intervention pilot-study. Front Public 
Health. 2024;12:1347825.
 92. Francois ME, Baldi JC, Manning PJ, Lucas SJE, Hawley JA, Wil-
liams MJA, Cotter JD. “Exercise snacks” before meals: a novel 
strategy to improve glycaemic control in individuals with insulin 
resistance. Diabetologia. 2014;57:1437–45.
 93. Gale JT, Wei DL, Haszard JJ, Brown RC, Taylor RW, Peddie MC. 
Breaking up evening sitting with resistance activity improves 
postprandial glycemic response: a randomized crossover study. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2023;55:1471–80.
 94. Caldwell HG, Coombs GB, Rafiei H, Ainslie PN, Little JP. 
Hourly staircase sprinting exercise “snacks” improve femoral 
artery shear patterns but not flow-mediated dilation or cerebro-
vascular regulation: a pilot study. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 
2021;46:521–9.
 95. Luppino FS, de Wit LM, Bouvy PF, Stijnen T, Cuijpers P, Pen-
ninx BWJH, Zitman FG. Overweight, obesity, and depression: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 2010;67:220–9.
 96. Abiri B, Hosseinpanah F, Banihashem S, Madinehzad SA, Vali-
zadeh M. Mental health and quality of life in different obesity 
phenotypes: a systematic review. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 
2022;20:63.
 97. Taylor VH, McIntyre RS, Remington G, Levitan RD, Stone-
hocker B, Sharma AM. Beyond pharmacotherapy: understand-
ing the links between obesity and chronic mental illness. Can J 
Psychiatry. 2012;57:5–12.
 98. Tomiyama AJ. Stress and Obesity. Annu Rev Psychol. 
2019;70:703–18.
 99. Rubino F, Puhl RM, Cummings DE, et al. Joint international 
consensus statement for ending stigma of obesity. Nat Med. 
2020;26:485–97.
 100. Kushner R. Taking a Weight History - Using Mnemonics to 
Learn a Missing Skill in Medical Education. MedEdPublish 
(2016). 2017;6:215.
 101. Chao AM, Moore M, Wadden TA. The past, present, and future 
of behavioral obesity treatment. Int J Obes. 2024. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1038/ s41366- 024- 01525-3.
 102. Vallis TM, Macklin D, Russell-Mayhew S. Canadian adult 
obesity clinical practice guidelines: effective psychological 
and behavioural interventions in obesity management. https://  
obesi tycan ada. ca/ guide lines/ behav ioural. Accessed 15 Aug 
2024.
 103. Wadden TA, Chao AM, Moore M, Tronieri JS, Gilden A, 
Amaro A, Leonard S, Jakicic JM. The role of lifestyle modi-
fication with second-generation anti-obesity medications: 
665Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666 
comparisons, questions, and clinical opportunities. Curr Obes 
Rep. 2023;12:453–73.
 104. Anderson JW, Konz EC, Frederich RC, Wood CL. Long-term 
weight-loss maintenance: a meta-analysis of US studies. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2001;74:579–84.
 105. Chakhtoura M, Haber R, Ghezzawi M, Rhayem C, Tcheroyan 
R, Mantzoros CS. Pharmacotherapy of obesity: an update on the 
available medications and drugs under investigation. EClinical-
Medicine. 2023;58: 101882.
 106. Saxon DR, Iwamoto SJ, Mettenbrink CJ, et  al. Antiobes-
ity Medication Use in 2.2 Million Adults Across Eight Large 
Health Care Organizations: 2009–2015. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2019;27:1975–81.
 107. Rocha-González HI, De la Cruz-Álvarez LE, Kammar-García A, 
Canizales-Quinteros S, Huerta-Cruz JC, Barranco-Garduño LM, 
Reyes-García JG. Weight loss at first month and development of 
tolerance as possible predictors of 30 mg phentermine efficacy 
at 6 months. J Pers Med. 2021. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ jpm11 
121354.
 108. Lewis KH, Fischer H, Ard J, et  al. Safety and effective-
ness of longer-term phentermine use: clinical outcomes from 
an electronic health record cohort. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2019;27:591–602.
 109. Eisenberg D, Shikora SA, Aarts E, et al. 2022 American society 
for metabolic and bariatric surgery (ASMBS) and international 
federation for the surgery of obesity and metabolic disorders 
(IFSO): Indications for metabolic and bariatric surgery. Surg 
Obes Relat Dis. 2022;18:1345–56.
 110. Wiggins T, Guidozzi N, Welbourn R, Ahmed AR, Markar SR. 
Association of bariatric surgery with all-cause mortality and inci-
dence of obesity-related disease at a population level: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2020;17: e1003206.
 111. King WC, Hinerman AS, Courcoulas AP. Weight regain after 
bariatric surgery: a systematic literature review and comparison 
across studies using a large reference sample. Surg Obes Relat 
Dis. 2020;16:1133–44.
 112. Uittenbogaart M, de Witte E, Romeijn MM, Luijten AAPM, 
van Dielen FMH, Leclercq WKG. Primary and secondary non-
response following bariatric surgery: a survey study in current 
bariatric practice in the Netherlands and Belgium. Obes Surg. 
2020;30:3394–401.
 113. Salminen P, Kow L, Aminian A, Kaplan LM, Nimeri A, Prager 
G, Behrens E, White KP, Shikora S. IFSO Consensus on Defini-
tions and Clinical Practice Guidelines for Obesity Management-an 
International Delphi Study. Obes Surg. 2024;34:30–42.
 114. Rubino F, Nathan DM, Eckel RH, et al. Metabolic surgery 
in the treatment algorithm for type 2 Diabetes: A joint state-
ment by international diabetes organizations. Diabetes Care. 
2016;39:861–77.
 115. Still CD, Benotti P, Mirshahi T, Cook A, Wood GC. DiaRem2: 
Incorporating duration of diabetes to improve prediction of dia-
betes remission after metabolic surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 
2019;15:717–24.
 116. Fatima F, Hjelmesæth J, Hertel JK, Svanevik M, Sandbu R, 
Småstuen MC, Hofsø D. Validation of Ad-DiaRem and ABCD 
Diabetes Remission Prediction Scores at 1-Year After Roux-en-
Y Gastric Bypass and Sleeve Gastrectomy in the Randomized 
Controlled Oseberg Trial. Obes Surg. 2022;32:801–9.
 117. Eskandaros MS, Abbass A, Ebeid EF, Darwish AA. Remission 
of Type II Diabetes Mellitus 1-Year Postoperative Following 
One Anastomosis Gastric Bypass in Correlation with ABCD, 
DiaRem, and DRS Scores. Obes Surg. 2022;32:450–6.
 118. Wang T, Tan J-Y (Benjamin), Liu X-L, Zhao I. Barriers and ena-
blers to implementing clinical practice guidelines in primary care: 
an overview of systematic reviews. BMJ Open. 2023;13:e062158.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
666 Current Obesity Reports (2024) 13:643–666
Authors and Affiliations
Emma A. Chávez‑Manzanera1,2 · Juan M. Vera‑Zertuche1,3 · Martha Kaufer‑Horwitz1,4 · 
Verónica Vázquez‑Velázquez2,5 · José R. Flores‑Lázaro6 · Leonor Mireles‑Zavala1 · Raúl Calzada‑León1,7 · 
Juan C. Garnica‑Cuellar1,8 · Verónica Sánchez‑Muñoz5 · Eduardo Ramírez‑Butanda2 · Ricardo Hernández‑González1 · 
María A. Vargas‑Martínez9 · Hugo Laviada‑Molina1,10 · Rafael Violante‑Ortíz1,11 · Héctor Esquivias‑Zavala12 · 
Eduardo García‑García1 · Fernando J. Lavalle‑González1,13 · Leonardo Mancillas‑Adame1,14,15 · 
Juan C. López‑Alvarenga1,16 · Juan F. Pérez‑Hernández2 · Erika V. Soto‑Fuentes2 · Reina R. Soriano‑Cortés2 · 
Eduardo W. Goicoechea‑Turcott17 · Gerardo Magallanes‑Díaz18 · Miguel F. Herrera‑Hernández3 · 
Simón Barquera‑Cervera19 · Edith Vargas‑Contreras20 · Cybele B. Díaz‑Wionczek5 · Morgan Salmon5 · 
Dinorah Ramírez‑De Jesús5 · Juan P . Villaseñor‑Díaz5 · Javiera Peña21 · José Ramos‑Rojas21 · Camila Ávila‑Oliver21 · 
Gabriel Rada21 · Brad Hussey22 · Ximena Ramos Salas23
 * Emma A. Chávez-Manzanera 
 emma.chavezm@incmnsz.mx
1 Obesity Workgroup, Sociedad Mexicana de Nutrición y 
Endocrinología, Mexico City, México
2 Obesity and Eating Disorders Clinic, Instituto Nacional 
de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, 
Mexico City, México
3 ABC Medical Center, Mexico City, México
4 Nutrition Division, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y 
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, México
5 Obesidades S.C, Mexico City, México
6 Sports Medicine Division, Universidad Nacional Autónoma 
de México, Mexico City, México
7 Service of Endocrinology, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, 
Mexico City, México
8 Endocrinology Division, Centro Médico Nacional 20 de 
Noviembre, Institute for Social Security and Services 
for State, Mexico City, México
9 Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Instituto Nacional 
de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, 
Mexico City, México
10 School of Health Sciences, Universidad Marista de Mérida, 
Mérida, México
11 Tampico Faculty of Medicine Alberto Romo Caballero, 
Universidad Autónoma de Tamaulipas, Tampico, 
Tamaulipas, México
12 Department for Continuing Education, Instituto Nacional de 
Psiquiatría Ramón de la Fuente Muñiz, Mexico City, México
13 Endocrine Service, Hospital Universitario Dr José 
E. González, Medicine School, Universidad Autónoma de 
Nuevo León, Nuevo Leon, México
14 Institute for Obesity Research, Instituto Tecnológico de 
Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, México
15 Internal Medicine Division, Medical School, and University 
Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo Leon, 
Nuevo Leon, México
16 Population Health & Biostatistics, School of Medicine, 
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Texas, United States
17 Hospital General Dr. Manuel Gea González, Mexico City, 
México
18 Department of Secondary Prevention Central level, Servicios 
de Salud IMSS-BIENESTAR , Mexico City, México
19 School of Public Health of Mexico at, Instituto Nacional de 
Salud Pública, Morelos, México
20 Department of Endocrinology, Hospital General de México 
“Dr. Eduardo Liceaga, Mexico City, México
21 Epistemonikos Foundation, Santiago, Chile
22 Replica Communications, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
23 Replica Communications, Kristianstad, Sweden