Vol.:(0123456789)
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40519-026-01813-z
RESEARCH
Italian clinical practice GRADE‑based guidelines on the diagnosis 
and treatment of overweight and obesity, endorsed by the Italian 
National Institute of Health
Rocco Barazzoni1 · Silvio Buscemi2 · Luca Busetto3 · Paolo Sbraccia4 · Simona Bo5 · Emanuele Cereda6 · 
Marco Chianelli7 · Sonja Chiappetta8 · Riccardo Dalle Grave9 · Walter de Caro10 · Giovanni Docimo11 · 
Giuseppe Galloro12 · Primiano Iannone13 · Frida Leonetti14 · Fabrizia Lisso15 · Maria Caterina Manca16 · 
Gerardo Medea17 · Manuela Merli18 · Anna Maria Moretti19 · Giuseppe Navarra20 · Uberto Pagotto21 · 
Barbara Paolini22 · Giovanni Papa23 · Nicola Perrotta24 · Andrea Pession25 · Vincenzo Pilone26 · 
Vincenzo Provenzano27 · Cecilia Ricciardi Rizzo28 · Maurizio Santomauro29 · Cristina Segura Garcia30 · 
Federico Spandonaro31 · Samir Sukkar32 · Patrizia Todisco33 · Dario Tuccinardi34 · Andrea Vania35 · Valentina Vanzi36 · 
Riccardo Williams37 · Iris Zani38 · Benedetta Ragghianti39 · Giovanni Antonio Silverii39 · Amanda Belluzzi40 · 
Maria Masulli41 · Maddalena Redini42 · Matteo Monami39
Received: 24 October 2025 / Accepted: 5 January 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Obesity is a chronic relapsing disease associated with increased morbidity and mortality and reduced quality of life. The 
present GRADE-based guidelines have been commissioned by the Italian Society of Obesity (SIO) by the Italian National 
Health Institute to provide evidence-based recommendations on obesity diagnosis and treatment. The panel identified 13 
clinical questions, organised into four domains: A. diagnostic criteria (4 questions); B. medical nutrition therapy (4 ques-
tions); C. pharmacological, surgical, and endoscopic treatments (4 questions); and D. miscellaneous (1 question). The expert 
panel recommends adopting at least one anthropometric index of abdominal visceral fat distribution beyond body mass index 
(BMI) for better clinical risk stratification. A structured lifestyle intervention (i.e., medical–nutritional treatment—MNT), 
preferably based on cognitive–behavioural therapeutic approach and including physical activity and a balanced diet, should 
be offered to all subjects living with obesity. Pharmacological or surgical treatment should be offered in addition to MNT 
when MNT is unable to reach clinical goals. In particular, pharmacological treatment should be considered as the preferred 
option for subjects with BMI > 27 kg/m 2 with comorbidities, and for those with BMI 30–39.9 kg/m 2, based on individual 
therapeutic goals and needs, adopting surgical treatment in selected cases or in case of OMM failure to reach clinical goals. 
For subjects with a BMI > 40 kg/m 2, surgical treatment may be considered conversely as a preferable option. Reduction of 
at least 10% of the initial body weight is associated with a better quality of life and a reduced risk of incident depression. 
The current guideline is endorsed by the Italian National Institute of Health, providing the new, updated clinical and legal 
reference for professionals involved in the management of subjects living with obesity in Italy.
Keywords Obesity · Guidelines · GRADE · Methods
Introduction
Obesity and obesity-related complications (ORCs) repre-
sent a growing public health problem in many countries 
due to their increasing prevalence with significant negative 
impact on quality of life, and rising economic burden [1 ]. 
Treatments for obesity based on lifestyle modification 
(medical–nutritional therapy—MNT) have limited efficacy, 
and their impact is often not sustained in the mid-to-long 
term [2]. Metabolic and bariatric surgery (MBS) has been 
increasingly introduced to achieve more substantial weight 
loss with strong superiority in reducing body weight [3 –5] 
and treating conditions, such as Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) 
[6], arterial hypertension (AH) [7 ], obstructive sleep apnea 
Rocco Barazzoni and Silvio Buscemi Equally contributed.
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 2 of 14
syndrome (OSAS) [8 ], and dyslipidemias (DL) [9 ]. How-
ever, the use of surgical treatment remains limited, due to 
several barriers, including costs, risks of adverse events, 
and organizational constraints [ 10]. Bariatric endoscopy 
has also been proposed to potentially overcome the above 
limitations, despite a less pronounced body weight reduction 
and lower effectiveness on comorbidity remission. Bariat-
ric endoscopy has indeed a better safety profile and higher 
affordability in terms of direct and indirect costs compared 
to surgery [11]; however, evidence on the effectiveness pro-
file of bariatric endoscopy is limited with few high-quality 
studies, relatively small sample size and insufficient follow-
up. As a consequence, clinical indications and usefulness of 
these procedures in treating individuals with overweight and 
obesity remain incompletely investigated and standardized 
[11]. Most importantly, pharmacological treatments based 
on incretin mimetic agents have become available in recent 
years, potentially combining more substantial weight loss 
with a safety profile and increasing evidence of a positive 
impact on several comorbidities.
The development and implementation of rigorous guide-
lines improves treatment appropriateness with strong poten-
tial to enhance the quality and effectiveness of care. In addi-
tion, increasing therapeutic options and growing debate on 
the most appropriate obesity diagnostic frameworks make 
updated guidance in these fields an urgent priority. The 
Italian National Institute of Health (ISS) has, therefore, 
entrusted the Italian Society of Obesity (SIO) to design and 
develop the first comprehensive Italian guideline aiming 
at assisting healthcare professionals in selecting the most 
appropriate diagnostic approach as well as options for the 
treatment of obesity and its related medical conditions. In 
the Italian regulatory context, the inclusion of guidelines 
in the National Guideline System is only possible after a 
rigorous methodological and formal review by the National 
Centre for Clinical Excellence under the Ministry of Health. 
In developing national guidelines, the Centre for Clinical 
Excellence recommends the use of the GRADE methodol-
ogy (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Develop-
ment, and Evaluation) [12], which requires the identification 
of specific clinical questions and the definition of relevant 
outcomes for each of them. The guideline content is reported 
in the current paper.
Methods
This manuscript represents an original scientific work; only 
the summary of recommendations was non-literally adapted 
from the Italian SIO guideline document (La diagnosi e la 
terapia dell’obesità nella popolazione adulta—ISS), while 
all methodological descriptions, evidence appraisal, and 
interpretation were independently developed. The detailed 
methodological process adopted to develop the present 
Guidelines is reported in a previous publication and Sup-
plementary Materials [13]. Briefly, between June and Octo-
ber 2024, a panel of 39 experts identified by ISS and led 
by SIO, in collaboration with other scientific societies, as 
well as an evidence review team (ERT, 4 members), worked 
to design clinical questions, identify clinical outcomes of 
interest, and collect and analyze available evidence based 
on pre-specified search strategies. The panel then provided 
evidence-based recommendations after a formal vote, using 
a two-step web-based Delphi method [14]. GRADE meth-
odology and PICO (Patient, Intervention, Comparison, Out-
come) conceptual framework [13, 15, 16] have been used to 
limit the impact of personal opinions and prejudices. Further 
assessments included economic cost-effectiveness analyses, 
evaluation of organizational impact, equity, acceptability, 
and feasibility of recommendations. Healthcare systems, 
infrastructures, human and financial resources across Ital-
ian regions have been considered in its development, and 
it is, therefore, primarily intended to be applicable in Italy.
The panel identified 13 clinical questions (Table  1), 
organized into four domains:
A. Diagnostic criteria (4 questions): literature search up to 
19/03/2025;
B. Medical nutrition therapy (4 questions): literature search 
up to 19/03/2025;
C. Pharmacological, surgical, and endoscopic treatments 
(4 questions): literature search up to 01/12/2024;
D. Miscellaneous (1 question): literature search up to 
01/12/2024.
The evidence review team identified the characteristics 
of relevant studies for each critical outcome, defining the 
search strategy and study inclusion criteria as previously 
reported [13]. GRADE evaluation for individual critical out-
comes has also been performed for each PICO. The guide-
line applies to adult individuals (age above 18 years) with a 
body mass index (BMI)≥ 27 kg/m 2.
Results
Table  1 reports, in summary, the recommendations for each 
PICO and the quality of the evidence retrieved.
Diagnostic criteria
PICO 1–3: In subjects with BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/
m2, is the adoption of additional anthropometric indexes 
(i.e., waist circumference—WC, waist-to-hip ratio—WHR, 
and waist-to-height ratio—WtHR) preferable to BMI alone 
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 3 of 14     9 
Table 1  Summary table of recommendations
N PICO Recommendation Strength of recommendation Quality of evidence
Diagnostic criteria
 1–3 In subjects with BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/m 2, is the 
adoption of anthropometric indexes (i.e., waist circumfer-
ence—WC, waist-to-hip ratio—WHR, and waist-to-height 
ratio—WtHR) preferable to BMI alone in the diagnosis 
and staging of obesity-related complications (ORCs)?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI between 25 and 
34.9 kg/m2, to use at least one anthropometric measure-
ment (i.e., WC, WHR, and WtHR) in addition to BMI 
to adequately diagnose and stage obesity and its related 
clinical risk
Strong in favor of the intervention Very low
 4 In subjects with BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/m 2, is the 
assessment of body composition, including the use of 
technical devices and methodologies, preferable to limiting 
the evaluation to anthropometric indexes, for the staging of 
obesity-related clinical risk?
We do not suggest, in subjects with BMI between 25 
and 34.9 kg/m2, routine implementation of technical 
device-based measurements for fat mass quantification 
with respect to the anthropometric indexes alone, for 
appropriate staging of obesity-related clinical risk
Conditional against the intervention Very low
Medical Nutrition Therapy
 5 In subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2, are structured lifestyle 
interventions preferable to non-structured lifestyle inter-
ventions (LSI) in overweight and obesity management?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2, 
structured lifestyle rather than non-structured lifestyle 
interventions in overweight and obesity management
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
 6 In subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2 are LSI based on cogni-
tive–behavioral therapy (CBT), preferable to other types 
of interventions (or standard of care), in overweight and 
obesity management?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2, edu-
cational interventions based on cognitive–behavioral 
therapy compared to other types of interventions (i.e., 
standard of care or no intervention) in overweight and 
obesity management
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
 7 We do not recommend in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2 a 
ketogenic diet versus balanced macronutrient diets (e.g., 
Mediterranean diet) for overweight and obesity treatment
We do not recommend in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 
a ketogenic diet versus balanced macronutrient diets 
(e.g., Mediterranean diet) for overweight and obesity 
treatment
Conditional against the intervention Very low
 8 In individuals with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2 are structured LSI, 
including combined aerobic and anaerobic physical exer-
cise, preferable to structured LSI, including aerobic physi-
cal exercise only, for overweight and obesity treatment?
In subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2, structured combined 
lifestyle interventions based on aerobic and anaerobic 
(combined) exercise are equally effective as those based 
on aerobic physical exercise only, for overweight and 
obesity treatment
No recommendation –
Pharmacological, surgical, and endoscopic treatments
 9 In subjects with BMI between 27 and 29.9 kg/m 2 and ORCs, 
is the treatment with EMA-approved OMM, in association 
with MNT, preferable to MNT alone for the treatment and 
management of overweight?
We suggest in subjects with a BMI between 27 and 
29.9 kg/m2 and ORCs, the use of OMM in association 
with MNT for the treatment of overweight
Conditional in favor of the intervention Low quality
 10 In subjects with BMI between 30 and 34.9 kg/m 2, which 
anti-obesity strategy (OMM, metabolic bariatric sur-
gery—MBS, or EBP—endoscopic bariatric procedures) 
associated with MNT, is preferable for the treatment and 
management of obesity?
We recommend treating subjects with class I obesity 
(BMI 30–34, .9 kg/m2), considering OMM as a first-line 
option in addition to MNT; surgical and endoscopic 
treatments should be considered as second-line options
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 4 of 14
in diagnosis and staging of obesity and obesity-related 
complications (ORCs)?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/
m2, to use at least one anthropometric measurement (i.e., WC, 
WHR, and WtHR) in addition to BMI to adequately diagnose 
and stage obesity and its related clinical risk
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with very 
low quality of evidence
Rationale
Several studies showed that anthropometric indexes, 
beyond BMI alone, can be useful in performing an appro-
priate and accurate diagnosis of obesity [17, 18] and in 
predicting ORCs (i.e., type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular dis-
eases, cancer), particularly among subgroups of subjects, 
such as older adults [19] and people with a high percent-
age of muscle mass [20]. However, available studies pro-
vide discordant results [21], which need to be assessed 
and confirmed by further high-quality literature. For this 
reason, the ERT decided to perform several analyses and 
meta-analyses, limiting them to either randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) or epidemiological analyses of RCTs. 
This decision was taken to achieve more rigorous and 
homogeneous evidence with lower risk of bias. Sensitiv -
ity and specificity (diagnostic accuracy) of anthropomet-
ric measures and BMI were extracted by available studies 
and compared with those deriving from dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA), and meta-analyses of odds ratios 
(ORs) for each parameter were performed to assess the 
predictive values for obesity-related complications.
In the Italian version of the present guidelines PICO 
1–3 were split in three different clinical questions (one 
each for any of the assessed index). We decided to group 
them together in a single PICO.
The ERT retrieved 7 observational studies [19, 22–27] 
assessing body fat content with DEXA and 5 epidemio -
logic analyses of RCTs [21, 28–31] enrolling 26.955 sub-
jects with a mean follow-up of 4.5 years. The analyses 
performed showed that: (1) the sensitivity of BMI and 
WC (fewer studies) ranged between 0.30 and 0.90 and 0.80 
and 0.99, respectively; (2) BMI was able to adequately 
predict the risk of developing diabetes and HHF, but not 
that of MACE and all-cause mortality; (3) WC and WHR 
were significantly associated with a higher risk of dia-
betes, HHF, MACE, and mortality; (4) WtHR, although 
assessed in a smaller number of studies, was significantly 
associated with a higher risk of MACE and cardiovascular 
mortality; and (5) visceral fat mass assessed with DEXA 
has been investigated only for the prediction of incident 
Table 1  (continued)
N PICO Recommendation Strength of recommendation Quality of evidence
 11 In subjects with BMI between 35 and 39.9 kg/m 2, which 
anti-obesity strategy (OMM, metabolic bariatric sur-
gery—MBS, or EBP—endoscopic bariatric procedures) 
associated with MNT, is preferable for the treatment and 
management of obesity?
We recommend to treat subjects with class II obesity 
(BMI 35–39.9 kg/m2) preferring OMM as a first-line 
option in addition to MNT; surgical and endoscopic 
treatments are valid options to be preferably adopted 
after OMM’s failure
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
 12 In subjects with BMI ≥ 40 kg/m 2, which anti-obesity strategy 
(OMM, metabolic bariatric surgery—MBS, or EBP—
endoscopic bariatric procedures) associated with MNT, is 
preferable for the treatment and management of obesity?
We recommend to treat subjects with class III obesity 
(BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2) preferring surgical over pharmaco-
logical and endoscopic options
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
Miscellaneous
 13 In subjects with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2, weight loss using either 
pharmacologic or surgical/endoscopic strategies is prefer-
able to maintaining a stable weight to achieve a psycho-
logical well-being?
We recommend in subjects with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2 a 
weight loss of at least 5% to achieve (or maintain) a 
psychological well-being
Strong in favor of the intervention Moderate
The column reported with bold characters corresponds with “recomendations”
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 5 of 14     9 
diabetes, with visceral fat being associated with a statisti-
cally significant higher risk for diabetes, but not superior 
to other indices.
The results of the above-mentioned analyses are exten-
sively reported in Supplementary Materials (Tables S1–S4 
and Figs. S1–S5). No pharmaco-economic analyses were 
retrieved.
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
In selected subgroups, it cannot be excluded that BMI alone 
can be adequate to stratify the risk of developing ORCs (e.g., 
subjects with higher degrees of obesity). On the other hand, 
other subgroups (e.g., athletes with a high percentage of 
free-fat mass or elderly subjects with sarcopenia) might need 
more than one additional anthropometric measure, poten-
tially including the assessment of body composition and lean 
mass with DEXA.
PICO 4: In subjects with BMI between 25 and 34.9 kg/
m2, is assessment of body composition, including use of 
technical devices and methods, preferable to anthropometric 
indexes alone, for the staging of obesity-related clinical risk?
We do not suggest, in subjects with BMI between 25 and 
34.9 kg/m 2, routine implementation of technical device-based 
measurements for fat mass quantification with respect to 
the anthropometric indexes alone, for appropriate staging of 
obesity-related clinical risk
Conditional recommendation against the intervention, with very 
low quality of evidence
Rationale
Several studies showed that various anthropometric indexes 
(not limited to BMI alone) may improve the diagnosis of 
obesity, including better prediction of complications related 
to excess fat mass (e.g., type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular dis-
eases and cancer), especially in selected subjects’ categories 
such as older adults [19] and people with higher levels of 
physical activity [20]. However, a direct evaluation of fat 
mass using imaging techniques, such as abdominal CT scan 
or DEXA, might represent an even more useful tool for a 
more accurate and proper staging of obesity-related clinical 
risk. To address this clinical question, we took into consid-
eration studies (RCTs and their subgroup analyses) using 
DEXA or abdominal CT. The ERT retrieved a subgroup 
analysis from one single RCT (i.e., Diabetes Prevention 
Program; Tables S5 and S6) [ 31] showing that total body 
fat measured by DEXA was associated with an increased 
risk of diabetes. The accuracy of DEXA was very similar to 
that obtained for WC.
The results of the above-mentioned analysis are reported 
in extenso in Supplementary Materials (Tables S5–S7). 
No pharmaco-economic studies were retrieved; DEXA is 
associated with higher costs than anthropometric indices 
measurements, and it is potentially associated with ionizing 
radiations damages. Considerations on specific subgroups 
of subjects.
Some subgroups of subjects (e.g., older adults, subjects 
with sarcopenia, etc.) might still benefit from the diagnostic 
accuracy of DEXA in terms of clinical risk assessment.
Medical nutrition therapy
PICO 5: In subjects with BMI≥ 25 kg/m 2, are structured 
lifestyle interventions preferable to non-structured lifestyle 
interventions (LSI) in overweight and obesity management?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2, structured 
lifestyle rather than non-structured lifestyle interventions in 
overweight and obesity management
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
Rationale
ERT retrieved 18 trials comparing structured and non-
structured LSI, showing relevant beneficial effects for 
structured interventions in terms of fat mass reduction, 
without any increased risk of adverse events. The lack of 
long-term follow-up limits the assessment of this interven-
tion. Despite limited evidence about its affordability, other 
key parameters, including feasibility, applicability, and cost-
effectiveness of structured LSI, appear to be superior to non-
structured interventions. The results of the above-mentioned 
analysis are reported in extenso in Supplementary Materials 
(Figs. S6–S10 and Tables S8 and S12).
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
Some categories of subjects (e.g., those with low literacy 
levels) might experience greater difficulties in attending and 
following structured education programs.
PICO 6: In subjects with BMI≥ 25 kg/m2, are LSI based 
on cognitive–behavioral therapy (CBT), preferable to other 
types of interventions (or standard of care), in overweight 
and obesity management?
We recommend, in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2, educational 
interventions based on cognitive–behavioral therapy compared 
to other types of interventions (i.e., standard of care or no 
intervention) in overweight and obesity management
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 6 of 14
Rationale
ERT retrieved 8 RCTs comparing CBT with other types of 
structured LSI, showing relevant beneficial effects on fat 
mass reduction in favor of CBT, without any increased risk 
of adverse events. The lack of long-term follow-up limits 
the assessment of this intervention. Despite limited evidence 
about its affordability, feasibility, applicability, and cost-
effectiveness of CBT appears to be superior to other struc-
tured interventions. CBT might be recommended wherever 
required competencies and skills are available. The results 
of the above-mentioned analysis are reported in extenso in 
Supplementary Materials (Tables S9 and S12, and Figs. 
S11–S14).
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
Some categories of subjects (e.g., those with low literacy 
levels) might experience greater difficulties in attending and 
following structured education programs.
PICO 7: In subjects with BMI≥ 25 kg/m2, is a ketogenic 
diet preferable to balanced macronutrient diets (e.g., Medi-
terranean diet), for overweight and obesity treatment?
We do not suggest in subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2 to routinely 
adopt a ketogenic diet versus balanced macronutrient diets 
(e.g., Mediterranean diet) for overweight and obesity treat-
ment
Conditional recommendation against of the intervention, with 
very low quality of evidence
Rationale
The ERT retrieved only 2 head-to-head RCTs, thus limit -
ing the possibility of making a strong recommendation on 
this clinical question. According to the limited evidence, no 
clinical advantage of ketogenic diets over balanced macro-
nutrient diets (e.g., Mediterranean diet) was observed. No 
financial evaluations have been published on this topic so 
far; however, we can hypothesize a financial/economic dis-
advantage when pursuing high adherence to the ketogenic 
diet, based on the need for commercial meal replacements 
with adequate, high protein and micronutrient intake 
[32–34]. The results of the above-mentioned analysis are 
reported in extenso in Supplementary Materials (Table S12 
and Figs. S15–S18).
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
A low-calorie ketogenic diet could be useful in selected cases 
for closely monitored, short-term treatments. On the other 
hand, subjects affected by eating disorders (e.g., anorexia, 
bulimia, etc.) could experience a clinical worsening after 
severe calorie restriction.
PICO 8: In subjects with BMI≥ 25 kg/m2, are structured 
LSI, including combined aerobic and anaerobic physical exer-
cise, preferable to structured LSI, including aerobic physical 
exercise only, for overweight and obesity treatment?
In subjects with BMI ≥ 25 kg/m 2, structured combined lifestyle 
interventions based on aerobic and anaerobic (combined) 
exercise are equally effective as those based on aerobic physi-
cal exercise only, for overweight and obesity treatment
Conditional recommendation neither in favour nor against the 
intervention, with low quality of evidence
Rationale
ERT retrieved 6 RCTs comparing combined aerobic and 
anaerobic physical exercise and aerobic physical exercise only. 
No statistically significant differences have been observed for 
any of the critical outcomes identified by the panelists. No 
safety issues were reported. From the financial point of view, 
no evidence was retrieved. The results of the above-mentioned 
analysis are reported in extenso in Supplementary Materials 
(Tables S11 and S12; Figs. S19–S21).
For the above reasons, no recommendation was formu-
lated in favor of either type of physical exercise, based on its 
impact on outcomes regarded as critical. It is of paramount 
importance to reaffirm that physical exercise programs must 
be implemented and regarded as fundamental in any structured 
educational program aimed at treating overweight and obesity.
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
Some categories of subjects might experience difficulty in 
practicing anaerobic exercise (e.g., older adults) in the absence 
of a structured intervention supported by dedicated, experi-
enced professionals and specialists. In other cases (e.g., sub-
jects with severe functional limitations), anaerobic exercise 
might be the only feasible exercise pattern. It is also plausible 
that anaerobic exercise may have higher clinical relevance 
and additional benefit for clinical outcomes not regarded as 
relevant by the ERT. In particular, anaerobic exercise may be 
more relevant and effective when muscle mass maintenance or 
recovery is a clinical priority (e.g., in older adults or subjects 
with sarcopenia).
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 7 of 14     9 
Pharmacological, surgical, and endoscopic 
treatments
PICO 9: In subjects with BMI between 27 and 29.9 kg/
m2 and ORCs, is the treatment with EMA-approved OMM 
(Obesity Management Medications), in association with 
MNT, preferable to MNT alone for the treatment and man-
agement of overweight?
We suggest in subjects with a BMI between 27 and 29.9 kg/m 2 
and ORCs, the use of OMM in association with MNT for the 
treatment of overweight
Conditional recommendation in favor of the intervention, with 
low quality of evidence
Rationale
Overweight, obesity and ORCs represent rising clinical 
and economic public health issues due to their dramatic 
growing prevalence. Although OMMs are indicated for 
the management of overweight in the presence of ORCs, 
use of OMMs in subjects with overweight and ORCs is not 
supported by the same grade of evidence as that available 
for OMM at higher BMI levels.
The ERT did not retrieve any RCTs specifically per -
formed in subjects with overweight. Two RCTs per -
formed in subjects with BMI> 27 kg/m 2 reported sub-
group analysis on subjects with BMI< 30 kg/m 2, one each 
with semaglutide [35] and liraglutide [35], showing sig-
nificant clinical advantages over placebo. Both liraglutide 
and semaglutide showed a significantly higher total body 
weight loss (TBWL)% in comparison with placebo (12.4% 
and 4.1%, respectively). Semaglutide was associated with 
a significantly lower incidence of MACE (cardiovascu-
lar mortality, stroke and acute coronary ischemia) [36]. 
Pharmaco-economic studies showed that the treatment of 
subjects with BMI> 27 kg/m 2 and ORCs is cost-effective. 
All the above-mentioned results are reported in extenso in 
two recent publications [37, 38].
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
The small number of retrieved studies prevented a reli-
able assessment of the present recommendation in differ -
ent subgroups of subjects (e.g., those with BMI between 
25 and 26.9 kg/m2, those with and without ORCs, different 
age subgroups, women and men, etc.).
PICO 10: In subjects with BMI between 30 and 34.9 
kg/m 2, which anti-obesity strategy (OMM, metabolic 
bariatric surgery—MBS, or EBP—endoscopic bariatric 
procedures) associated with MNT, is preferable for the 
treatment and management of obesity?
We recommend to treat subjects with class I obesity (BMI 
30–34, 0.9 kg/m 2), considering OMM as a first-line option in 
addition to MNT; surgical and endoscopic treatments should 
be considered as second-line options
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
Rationale
Pharmacologic and/or surgical therapy in subjects with 
obesity, especially when complicated by ORCs, have 
been assessed in many RCTs, supporting the importance 
of treating obesity to reduce the risk of mortality and 
complications.
The ERT retrieved 23 RCTs (24 comparisons) per -
formed in cohorts with BMI between 30 and 34.9 kg/m 2, 
comparing several pharmacologic (orlistat, liraglutide, 
semaglutide, tirzepatide), endoscopic (IGB) and surgical 
options (gastric bypasses and sleeve gastrectomy) either 
with placebo or standard of care (SoC). Some treatments 
showed to be more effective in terms of weight loss (i.e., 
surgical options, semaglutide and tirzepatide). Among 
EBP, only endosleeve gastroplasty (ESG) showed a good 
efficacy profile, despite a high risk of SAE, similar to 
that observed for MBS. Semaglutide was associated with 
a significant reduction of all-cause mortality and risk of 
incident MACE, type 2 diabetes, and a higher chance of 
diabetes remission.
Pharmaco-economic studies showed that both surgical 
and pharmacologic options are cost-effective. Notably, 
cost of OMM is not currently reimbursed in Italy, while 
cost of MBS and EBP is, rising possible equity concerns. 
All the mentioned-above results are reported in extenso in 
two recent publications [37, 38].
Considerations on specific subgroup of subjects
The relatively small number of pre-planned subgroup anal-
yses of retrieved studies prevented a reliable assessment 
of the present recommendation in different subgroups of 
subjects (e.g., those with and without ORCs, different age 
subgroups, women and men, etc.)
PICO 11: In subjects with BMI between 35 and 39.9 
kg/m 2, which anti-obesity strategy (OMM, metabolic 
bariatric surgery—MBS, or EBP—endoscopic bariatric 
procedures) associated with MNT, is preferable for the 
treatment and management of obesity?
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 8 of 14
We recommend to treat subjects with class II obesity (BMI 
35–39.9 kg/m 2) preferring OMM as a first-line option in 
addition to MNT; surgical and endoscopic treatments are valid 
options to be preferably adopted in case of failure of OMM
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
Rationale
Pharmacologic and/or surgical therapy in subjects with 
obesity, especially when complicated by ORCs, have been 
assessed in many RCTs, supporting the importance of treat-
ing obesity to reduce the risk of mortality and complications.
The ERT retrieved 57 RCTs performed in subjects with 
BMI between 35 and 39.9 kg/m2, comparing different phar-
macologic, endoscopic and surgical therapeutic strategies 
either with placebo or SoC. Some therapeutic strategies 
were associated with higher TBWL%, including most sur -
gical procedures (except for laparoscopic adjustable gastric 
banding—LAGB), tirzepatide, semaglutide, and ESG. Surgi-
cal and endoscopic treatments are associated with a higher 
risk of serious adverse events, while no relevant safety issues 
were reported for OMM, except NB.
All OMMs, except orlistat, as well as RYGB and SG, 
effectively increase diabetes remission rate. Semaglutide and 
tirzepatide were associated with a lower risk of hospitaliza-
tion for heart failure, and tirzepatide with a higher rate of 
OSAS and MASH (Metabolic-Associated Steato-Hepatitis) 
remission, and an improvement of hepatic fibrosis.
Pharmaco-economic studies show that both surgical and 
pharmacologic therapies have optimal cost-effectiveness 
profiles. Notably, the cost of OMM is not currently reim-
bursed in Italy, while the cost of MBS and EBP is, raising 
possible equity concerns. All the above-mentioned results 
are reported in extenso in two recent publications [37, 38].
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
The relatively small number of pre-planned subgroup analy-
ses of retrieved studies prevented reliable assessment of the 
present recommendation in different subgroups of subjects 
(e.g., those with and without ORCs, different age subgroups, 
women and men, etc.).
PICO 12: In subjects with BMI ≥ 40kg/m 2, which anti-
obesity strategy (OMM, metabolic bariatric surgery—MBS, 
or EBP—endoscopic bariatric procedures) associated with 
MNT, is preferable for the treatment and management of 
obesity?
We recommend to treat subjects with class III obesity 
(BMI ≥ 40 kg/m 2) preferring surgical over pharmacological 
and endoscopic options, in addition to MNT
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
Rationale
Severe obesity and its ORCs also represent a rising public 
health issue due to a growing prevalence, a relevant impact 
on subjects’ health and quality of life and a huge economic 
burden-related. Pharmacologic and/or surgical therapy in 
subjects with severe obesity, especially when complicated 
by ORCs, are supported by several lines of evidence.
The ERT retrieved 54 RCTs, all performed with MBS, 
with the exception of 3 studies, one and two RCTs with 
semaglutide and intragastric balloon (IGB), respectively. 
MBS (RYGB, OAGB, LVGB, GCP, SG, SADI e BPD) effec-
tively reduced body weight in the long term (with the excep-
tion of LAGB and GCP), with an increased risk of SAE, 
particularly for BPD and SAD, and LVGB. Among OMMs, 
only semaglutide has been assessed in this class of obesity 
reporting a TBWL of 10% in the short term; this effect was 
statistically inferior to those observed for MBS (>15–20%). 
No RCTs were retrieved for EBP.
Pharmaco-economic studies show that all treatment 
strategies are cost-effective. Cost of OMM is not currently 
reimbursed in Italy raising possible equity concerns, since 
the cost of MBS and EBP is reimbursed. All the above-
mentioned results are reported in extenso in two recent pub-
lications [37, 38].
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
Subjects at high risk for surgical complications (e.g., 
BMI>50 kg/m2, multiple comorbid conditions, etc.) or with 
the highest BMI might benefit from OMMs pre- and/or post-
surgical treatment. Some OMMs (e.g., tirzepatide) have not 
been extensively studied in subjects with BMI≥ 40 kg/m 2, 
but their efficacy has been widely proven, and their use could 
be useful in this class of obesity.
Miscellaneous
PICO 13: In subjects with BMI≥ 30 kg/m 2, is weight loss 
using either pharmacological or surgical/endoscopic strate-
gies preferable to maintaining a stable weight to achieve a 
psychological well-being?
We recommend in subjects with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 a weight loss 
of at least 5% to achieve (or maintain) a psychological well-
being
Strong recommendation in favor of the intervention, with mod-
erate quality of evidence
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 9 of 14     9 
Rationale
It is widely acknowledged that excess body weight is 
strongly linked with social stigma, potentially affecting the 
psychological well-being of subjects living with obesity 
[39]. Weight loss should theoretically improve the quality of 
life and reduce the risk of incident depression and anxiety, as 
suggested by several studies [40]. Recently, some concerns 
have been raised about psychiatric safety for some OMMs 
[39, 40]. Relevant weight loss following surgical procedures 
[41] or new incretin-mimetic OMMs might unmask hidden, 
pre-existing psycho-pathological alterations [42].
The ERT retrieved 26 RCTs determining a placebo-
subtracted TBWL of at least 5%, showing that: (1) weight 
loss greater than 5% produces a 28% risk reduction of inci-
dent depression, irrespective of mean entry BMI. A greater 
weight loss (at least 10%) seems to be associated with a 
lower risk of incident depression; (2) weight loss is not 
associated with any change in the incidence of anxiety; and 
(3) weight loss, irrespective of the implemented strategy 
(surgical or pharmacological), is associated with a general 
improvement of self-reported quality of life.
No pharmaco-economic studies were retrieved on this 
topic.
The cost of OMM is not currently reimbursed in Italy, ris-
ing possible equity concerns, since the cost of MBS and EBP 
is reimbursed. All the above-mentioned results are reported 
in extenso in a recent publication [37, 38, 43].
Considerations on specific subgroups of subjects
We cannot exclude that in some subgroups (e.g., elderly, 
subjects with previous or actual psychiatric disorders) 
weight loss might be associated with different outcomes 
from those reported in the present recommendation.
Discussion
The growing burden of obesity and the large amount of 
published clinical trials exploring newer pharmacological 
and surgical therapies create an urgent priority to update 
recommendations on obesity treatment. Moreover, several 
concerns have been raised about the diagnostic criteria of 
obesity and the limitations related to the use of BMI alone 
to define a broad spectrum of chronic and multifactorial 
organ dysfunctions [43– 45]. Indeed, considering the cur -
rent legislation on professional liability, correct, appropriate 
indications for diagnosis and treatment of obesity can sup-
port clinicians in the context of increasing legal claims. In 
this context, the Italian Society of Obesity has been invited 
by the Italian National Institute of Health (ISS) to develop 
a GRADE-based guideline on the diagnosis and treatment 
of obesity. The broader areas covered by clinical questions 
included in the present guidelines were: diagnostic criteria, 
MNT, pharmacological, surgical, and endoscopic therapies, 
and psychological impact of weight loss.
The first challenge in facing obesity and its related com-
plications is represented by diagnostic criteria, which are 
increasingly debated by scientific societies and consensus 
groups, without a full agreement on tools and thresholds to 
adopt. The majority of authors and scientific societies agree 
that BMI alone is inadequate for optimal identification of 
excess fat mass and the risk of incident ORCs, proposing dif-
ferent solutions and tools to overcome BMI limitations. For 
instance, the Lancet Commission recently proposed the use 
of at least one anthropometric index in addition to BMI [17]; 
EASO suggests the use of the waist-to-height ratio [44], 
etc.). However, no formal analyses to assess the superiority 
of an approach over the other have been attempted so far. 
We, therefore, collected studies comparing anthropometric 
indices with BMI thresholds, and found that concomitant 
use of waist circumference (or its related indices) increases 
the ability of identifying fat mass excess (using DEXA as 
the reference category) and subsequent risk of ORCs. The 
routine use of waist circumference-based anthropometric 
indices can, therefore, provide useful information, not only 
on the amount of body fat excess, but also about its distri-
bution, which is independently correlated with the risk of 
cardiovascular and metabolic disease. Use of such indices 
is, therefore, recommended in addition to BMI. Although the 
certainty of evidence supporting this recommendation was 
rated as very low, the panel issued a strong recommenda-
tion based on GRADE Evidence-to-Decision considerations, 
including the absence of harm, minimal resource use, high 
feasibility, wide acceptability, and the potential for clinically 
meaningful improvement in cardiometabolic risk stratifica-
tion. This approach was deemed proportionate and aligned 
with patient and clinician values, despite limitations in the 
available evidence.
Another pivotal topic addressed by the present guideline 
is the importance of medical nutrition therapy. Based on 
retrieved evidence and meta-analyses, we confirmed the 
efficacy of structured LSI, particularly those based on cog-
nitive–behavioral approaches, compared to the standard of 
care (dietary or physical activity advice). A structured inter-
vention, in fact, is aimed at providing knowledge and skills 
required for implementing a healthy lifestyle, promoting a 
holistic approach, taking into consideration also psychologi-
cal and emotional aspects. Structured education programs 
can facilitate a therapeutic alliance between healthcare pro-
fessionals and subjects living with obesity as well as their 
caregivers, thereby increasing therapeutic adherence and 
compliance. Educational programs based on CBT appear to 
be more effective than other types of interventions, although 
their adoption requires additional skills and organization 
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 10 of 14
models that may be cumbersome to implement in all cent-
ers involved in the management of obesity. The conditional 
recommendation against ketogenic diets was primarily based 
on the lack of demonstrated clinical superiority over bal-
anced dietary approaches and concerns regarding long-term 
adherence, while economic considerations were regarded as 
secondary and hypothesis-generating in the absence of for -
mal cost-effectiveness analyses.
Another important aspect addressed by the present 
guideline is the assessment of available pharmacological 
and surgical treatments and their role in obesity manage-
ment. Similar to other therapeutic algorithms [45– 47], the 
present guideline assessed the efficacy and safety of dif-
ferent anti-obesity strategies. The novelty of the present 
work is that of providing stratified recommendations for 
different classes of obesity. Based on available evidence, 
subjects affected by mild to moderate obesity (class I and 
II) should be treated preferentially with OMMs added 
to MNT. Among subjects with higher BMI (class III of 
obesity), the surgical option should be considered as the 
first-line option whenever possible. The use of multimodal 
strategies with MNT associated with OMMs and MBS 
could be most effective in several selected cases, after 
careful assessment of efficacy, safety, and costs. The cur -
rent recommendations also specifically took into account 
the different efficacy and safety profiles for OMMs and 
MBS, and other parameters, including but not limited to 
effects on ORCs treatment and prevention, cost-effective-
ness, etc. MBS has been traditionally considered more 
effective than OMMs despite a higher risk of SAE. Newer 
incretin-mimetic OMMs have, however, become available 
(i.e., semaglutide and tirzepatide) with greater efficacy 
than previously available agents (i.e., orlistat, naltrex-
one–bupropion, and liraglutide). When comparing indi-
vidual anti-obesity strategies in trials enrolling subjects 
with lower classes of obesity (i.e., Classes I and II), newer 
OMMs seem to be competitive towards certain surgical 
procedures (i.e., SG, LAGB, and GCP) and not inferior 
to gastric bypass and SADI or BPD [ 37, 38, 43]. On the 
other hand, the safety profile of OMMs remains consider -
ably better than any surgical intervention. Based on these 
findings, the expert panel decided to recommend the use 
of newer OMMs as first-line therapies in class I and II 
obesity, considering MBS only in case of treatment fail-
ure or insufficient weight loss. In the highest obesity class 
with BMI>40 kg/m 2, MBS (in particular, gastric bypass, 
SG, SADI, and BPD) still represents the first option due 
to its greater efficacy in terms of weight loss and the very 
limited evidence on OMMs. Several types of MBS seem to 
be preferable over others; RYGB, OAGB, and SG are more 
effective (i.e., LAGB and GCP) or have better safety pro-
file (i.e., SADI and BPD) among metabolic and bariatric 
surgical interventions [37, 38, 43]. From a feasibility and 
equity perspective, the panel acknowledged that OMM are 
not currently reimbursed within the Italian National Health 
Service, which may represent a relevant barrier to imple-
mentation. However, this recommendation reflects clini-
cal appropriateness and proportionality based on available 
evidence, and highlights a potential misalignment between 
evidence-based care and current reimbursement policies, 
with implications for equity that warrant consideration in 
future health policy decisions.
The last PICO of the present guidelines addressed the 
effects of weight loss on quality of life and the psychologi-
cal domain. Available evidence has shown that treatments 
inducing weight loss are not associated with detrimental 
effects on mental health; conversely, weight loss seems to 
be associated with a reduced risk of depression, particu-
larly for weight loss greater than 10%. The only relevant 
exception is the combination of naltrexone/bupropion, 
which was reportedly associated with an increased risk 
of anxiety [43].
Limitations
Several limitations should be acknowledged, particularly 
for PICOs regarding pharmacological and surgical treat-
ments of obesity. The quality of trials is not homogeneous, 
possibly introducing several biases. The open-label design 
inevitably adopted in many of the included RCTs on MBS 
could have introduced a bias in favor of surgical approaches 
in comparison with OMMs, which are usually compared to 
placebo (the placebo effect is not null in terms of weight 
loss). Moreover, to compare different surgical and nonsur -
gical strategies for treating obesity, the ERT was forced to 
perform network meta-analyses with a heterogeneous refer-
ence category (i.e., placebo/lifestyle interventions/standard 
of care). In fact, most RCTs performed on OMMs are usually 
placebo-controlled, whereas EBP and MBS are often com-
pared to lifestyle interventions or no therapy (i.e., uncon-
trolled studies). This could represent a source of heteroge-
neity, and it could have introduced a bias against OMMs, 
underestimating the actual impact on the primary endpoint. 
Moreover, limited information on the long-term efficacy of 
pharmacological treatments and different follow-ups and 
treatment across different anti-obesity strategies makes for-
mal comparisons between OMMs, EBP, and MBS more dif-
ficult. Finally, despite favorable cost-effectiveness profiles 
of all anti-obesity strategies analyzed, a formal comparison 
across different strategies is complex due to different reim-
bursement policies in Italy. MBS and EBP, but not OMMs, 
are reimbursed from the Italian National Health Institute, 
thus generating potential inequity based on socioeconomic 
status, as previously stated.
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 11 of 14     9 
Conclusions
In conclusion, the present guidelines, endorsed by the Ital-
ian National Institute of Health, represent the new clini-
cal and legal reference for all professionals involved in 
the management of subjects living with obesity in Italy. 
The main recommendations included in these guidelines 
refer to diagnostic and therapeutic clinical questions. In 
summary, the expert panel strongly recommend, as sug-
gested by available literature, adopting at least one anthro-
pometric index, beyond BMI, to better diagnose and stage 
obesity. Moreover, a structured lifestyle intervention (i.e., 
MNT; preferably based on cognitive–behavioral therapy 
and including physical activity and a balanced macronutri-
ent diet) should be offered to all subjects living with obe-
sity. The use of pharmacological and surgical treatments, 
in addition to MNT, should be based on therapeutic goals 
and needs, considering OMM (particularly tirzepatide and 
semaglutide) as a first-line option, except for cases with 
the highest obesity class or in cases of OMM failure to 
reach individualized clinical goals.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40519- 026- 01813-z.
Author contributions M.M., R.B., S.B., L.B., and P.S. wrote the main 
manuscript text; M.M., G.S., Ma.Ma., and B.R. performed all analyses. 
All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di 
Palermo within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. The authors declared to 
have no funding to disclose.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the 
current study.
Declarations 
Competing interests All panel members and members of the Evidence 
Review Team (ERT) completed the conflict of interest disclosure form 
developed by the CNEC. All disclosures have been enclosed during 
the submission process and are publicly available. No panellists have 
relevant COI to disclose, except for MM and UP. MM received speak-
ing fees from Lilly. UP received fees from Lilly and NovoNordisk’ 
Advisory Boards and speaking fees from Rhythm.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
 1. Global, regional, and national prevalence of adult overweight 
and obesity, 1990–2021, with forecasts to 2050: a forecast-
ing study for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2021. Lan-
cet 2025;405(10481):813–838. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0140- 
6736(25) 00355-1.
 2. Wadden TA, Tronieri JS, Butryn ML (2020) Lifestyle modifica-
tion approaches for the treatment of obesity in adults. Am Psychol 
75(2):235–251. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ amp00 00517
 3. De Luca M, Zese M, Bandini G et al (2023) Metabolic bariatric 
surgery as a therapeutic option for patients with type 2 diabetes: 
a meta-analysis and network meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. Diabetes Obes Metab 25(8):2362–2373. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1111/ dom. 15117
 4. De Luca M, Zese M, Silverii GA et al (2023) Bariatric surgery 
for patients with overweight/obesity. A comprehensive grading 
methodology and network metanalysis of randomized controlled 
trials on weight loss outcomes and adverse events. Obes Surg 
33(12):4147–4158. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11695- 023- 06909-4
 5. Di Lorenzo N, Antoniou SA, Batterham RL et al (2020) Clinical 
practice guidelines of the European Association for Endoscopic 
Surgery (EAES) on bariatric surgery: update 2020 endorsed by 
IFSO-EC, EASO and ESPCOP. Surg Endosc 34(6):2332–2358. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00464- 020- 07555-y
 6. Cresci B, Cosentino C, Monami M, Mannucci E (2020) Meta-
bolic surgery for the treatment of type 2 diabetes: a network meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Obes Metab 
22(8):1378–1387. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ dom. 14045
 7. Wang L, Lin M, Yu J et al (2021) The impact of bariatric sur -
gery versus non-surgical treatment on blood pressure: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Obes Surg 31(11):4970–4984. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11695- 021- 05671-9
 8. Jiang T, Zhang X, Wang H, Yi X (2024) Metabolic and bari-
atric surgery for obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome: bibliomet-
ric analysis and visualisation from 1999 to 2023. BMJ Open 
14(10):e089233. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmjop en- 2024- 089233
 9. Closs C, Ackerman M, Masson W et al (2022) Effectiveness of 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass vs sleeve gastrectomy on lipid levels in 
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. J Gastrointest Surg 26(8):1575–
1584. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11605- 022- 05338-5
 10. Alrubaian F, Mulla Z (2023) Governments policy measures to 
address obesity among adults: a scoping review of the global evi-
dence. Lancet 402(Suppl 1):S20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0140- 
6736(23) 02132-3
 11. Abu Dayyeh BK, Bazerbachi F, Vargas EJ et al (2022) Endo-
scopic sleeve gastroplasty for treatment of class 1 and 2 obesity 
(MERIT): a prospective, multicentre, randomised trial. Lancet 
400(10350):441–451. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0140- 6736(22) 
01280-6
 12. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Santesso N et al (2013) Grade guidelines: 
12. Preparing summary of findings tables-binary outcomes. J Clin 
Epidemiol 66(2):158–172. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jclin epi. 2012. 
01. 012
 13. Barazzoni R, Buscemi S, Busetto L et al (2025) Development of 
the Italian clinical practice guideline on diagnosing and treating 
obesity in adults: scope and methodological aspects. Eat Weight 
Disord 30(1):47. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40519- 025- 01747-y
 14. de Villiers MR, de Villiers PJ, Kent AP (2005) The Delphi 
technique in health sciences education research. Med Teach 
27(7):639–643. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13611 26050 00699 47
 15. Brozek JL, Akl EA, Alonso-Coello P et al (2009) Grading quality 
of evidence and strength of recommendations in clinical practice 
guidelines. Part 1 of 3. An overview of the GRADE approach 
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 12 of 14
and grading quality of evidence about interventions. Allergy 
64(5):669–677. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1398- 9995. 2009. 01973.x
 16. Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J et al (2009) The PRISMA 
statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of 
studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and 
elaboration. BMJ 339:b2700. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. b2700
 17. Rubino F, Batterham RL, Koch M et al (2023) Lancet Diabetes 
& Endocrinology Commission on the Definition and Diagnosis 
of Clinical Obesity. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 11(4):226–228. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s2213- 8587(23) 00058-x
 18. Donini LM, Busetto L, Bischoff SC et al (2022) Definition and 
diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity: ESPEN and EASO con-
sensus statement. Obes Facts 15(3):321–335. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1159/ 00052 1241
 19. Vasconcelos FA, Cordeiro BA, Rech CR, Petroski EL (2010) Sen-
sitivity and specificity of the body mass index for the diagnosis 
of overweight/obesity in elderly. Cad Saude Publica 26(8):1519–
1527. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ s0102- 311x2 01000 08000 06
 20. Grier T, Canham-Chervak M, Sharp M, Jones BH (2015) Does 
body mass index misclassify physically active young men. Prev 
Med Rep 2:483–487. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. pmedr. 2015. 06. 003
 21. German CA, Laughey B, Bertoni AG, Yeboah J (2020) Associa-
tions between BMI, waist circumference, central obesity and out-
comes in type II diabetes mellitus: the ACCORD trial. J Diabetes 
Complications 34(3):107499. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jdiac omp. 
2019. 107499
 22. Hyman MH, Peled TJ, Hyman NM, Tan J, Guo X, Rotter JI (2023) 
Differences in BMI obesity measures in a workers compensa-
tion population: a cross-sectional study. Ann Med Surg (Lond) 
85(5):1607–1613. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ ms9. 00000 00000 
000428
 23. Alammar M, Alsoghayer S, El-Abd K, Alkhenizan A (2020) 
Diagnostic accuracy of body mass index (BMI) when diagnos-
ing obesity in a Saudi adult population in a primary care setting, 
cross sectional, retrospective study. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 
13:2515–2520. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2147/ dmso. S2630 63
 24. Alqarni AM, Aljabr AS, Abdelwahab MM et al (2023) Accuracy 
of body mass index compared to whole-body dual energy X-ray 
absorptiometry in diagnosing obesity in adults in the Eastern 
Province of Saudi Arabia: a cross-sectional study. J Family Com-
munity Med 30(4):259–266. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4103/ jfcm. jfcm_ 
85_ 23
 25. Zwierzchowska A, Kantyka J, Rosołek B, Nawrat-Szołtysik A, 
Małecki A (2022) Sensitivity and specificity of anthropometric 
indices in identifying obesity in women over 40 years of age and 
their variability in subsequent decades of life. Biology (Basel). 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ biolo gy111 21804
 26. Porto LG, Nogueira RM, Nogueira EC et al (2016) Agreement 
between BMI and body fat obesity definitions in a physically 
active population. Arch Endocrinol Metab 60(6):515–525. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1590/ 2359- 39970 00000 220
 27. Batsis JA, Mackenzie TA, Bartels SJ, Sahakyan KR, Somers VK, 
Lopez-Jimenez F (2016) Diagnostic accuracy of body mass index 
to identify obesity in older adults: NHANES 1999–2004. Int J 
Obes (Lond) 40(5):761–767. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ ijo. 2015. 243
 28. Franek E, Pais P, Basile J et al (2023) General versus central 
adiposity as risk factors for cardiovascular-related outcomes in a 
high-risk population with type 2 diabetes: a post hoc analysis of 
the REWIND trial. Cardiovasc Diabetol 22(1):52. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1186/ s12933- 023- 01757-z
 29. Kadakia MB, Fox CS, Scirica BM, Murphy SA, Bonaca MP, Mor-
row DA (2011) Central obesity and cardiovascular outcomes in 
patients with acute coronary syndrome: observations from the 
MERLIN-TIMI 36 trial. Heart 97(21):1782–1787. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1136/ heart jnl- 2011- 300231
 30. Rådholm K, Chalmers J, Ohkuma T et al (2018) Use of the waist-
to-height ratio to predict cardiovascular risk in patients with 
diabetes: results from the ADVANCE-ON study. Diabetes Obes 
Metab 20(8):1903–1910. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ dom. 13311
 31. Bray GA, Jablonski KA, Fujimoto WY et al (2008) Relation of 
central adiposity and body mass index to the development of 
diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention Program. Am J Clin Nutr 
87(5):1212–1218. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ ajcn/ 87.5. 1212
 32. Strombotne KL, Lum J, Pizer SD, Figueroa S, Frakt AB, Conlin 
PR (2024) Clinical effectiveness and cost-impact after 2 years of 
a ketogenic diet and virtual coaching intervention for patients with 
diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 26(3):1016–1022. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1111/ dom. 15401
 33. Spielman AB, Kanders B, Kienholz M, Blackburn GL (1992) The 
cost of losing: an analysis of commercial weight-loss programs in 
a metropolitan area. J Am Coll Nutr 11(1):36–41. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1080/ 07315 724. 1992. 10718 194
 34. Razavi AC, Sapin A, Monlezun DJ et al (2021) Effect of culi-
nary education curriculum on Mediterranean diet adherence and 
food cost savings in families: a randomised controlled trial. Pub-
lic Health Nutr 24(8):2297–2303. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ s1368 
98002 00022 56
 35. le Roux CW, Astrup A, Fujioka K et al (2017) 3 years of liraglu-
tide versus placebo for type 2 diabetes risk reduction and weight 
management in individuals with prediabetes: a randomised, dou-
ble-blind trial. Lancet 389(10077):1399–1409. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ s0140- 6736(17) 30069-7
 36. Lincoff AM, Brown-Frandsen K, Colhoun HM et al (2023) Sema-
glutide and cardiovascular outcomes in obesity without diabe-
tes. N Engl J Med 389(24):2221–2232. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1056/ 
NEJMo a2307 563
 37. Barazzoni R, Monami M, Buscemi S, et al. Efficacy and Safety of 
European Medicines Agency (EMA) Approved Pharmacological, 
Endoscopic, and Surgical Treatments in different classes of obe-
sity: a Network Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials 
for the development of the SIO (Società Italiana Obesità) Italian 
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Overweight and 
Obesity. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism 2025. Epub-ahead of 
print.
 38. De Luca M, V. CR, Belluzzi A, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Phar-
macological, Endoscopic, and Surgical Treatments for Obesity. A 
GRADE-based Network Meta-Analysis. Obesity (Silver Spring) 
2025. Epub-ahead of print.
 39. Fabricatore AN, Wadden TA, Higginbotham AJ et al (2011) 
Intentional weight loss and changes in symptoms of depres-
sion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Obes (Lond) 
35(11):1363–1376. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ ijo. 2011.2
 40. McIntyre RS, Mansur RB, Rosenblat JD et al (2025) Glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) and suicidality: a 
replication study using reports to the World Health Organiza-
tion pharmacovigilance database (VigiBase®). J Affect Disord 
369:922–927. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jad. 2024. 10. 062
 41. Alyahya RA, Alnujaidi MA (2022) Prevalence and outcomes of 
depression after bariatric surgery: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Cureus 14(6):e25651. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7759/ cureus. 
25651
 42. Arillotta D, Floresta G, Guirguis A et al (2023) GLP-1 receptor 
agonists and related mental health issues; insights from a range 
of social media platforms using a mixed-methods approach. Brain 
Sci. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ brain sci13 111503
 43. Silverii A, Monami M, Rotella F, et al. Weight-reducing treat-
ments are associated with an improvement in depression, func-
tional health status, and quality of life: a meta-analysis of rand-
omized controlled trials. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism 2025; 
Epub-ahead of print.
Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9  
 Page 13 of 14     9 
 44. Busetto L, Dicker D, Frühbeck G et al (2024) A new frame-
work for the diagnosis, staging and management of obesity in 
adults. Nat Med 30(9):2395–2399. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s41591- 024- 03095-3
 45. McGowan B, Ciudin A, Baker JL et al (2025) A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the efficacy and safety of pharmacological 
treatments for obesity in adults. Nat Med. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
s41591- 025- 03978-z
 46. McGowan B, Ciudin A, Baker JL et al (2025) Framework for the 
pharmacological treatment of obesity and its complications from 
the European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO). Nat 
Med. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41591- 025- 03765-w
 47. Pedersen SD, Manjoo P, Dash S, Jain A, Pearce N, Poddar M 
(2025) Pharmacotherapy for obesity management in adults: 2025 
clinical practice guideline update. CMAJ 197(27):E797-e809. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1503/ cmaj. 250502
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Rocco Barazzoni1 · Silvio Buscemi2 · Luca Busetto3 · Paolo Sbraccia4 · Simona Bo5 · Emanuele Cereda6 · 
Marco Chianelli7 · Sonja Chiappetta8 · Riccardo Dalle Grave9 · Walter de Caro10 · Giovanni Docimo11 · 
Giuseppe Galloro12 · Primiano Iannone13 · Frida Leonetti14 · Fabrizia Lisso15 · Maria Caterina Manca16 · 
Gerardo Medea17 · Manuela Merli18 · Anna Maria Moretti19 · Giuseppe Navarra20 · Uberto Pagotto21 · 
Barbara Paolini22 · Giovanni Papa23 · Nicola Perrotta24 · Andrea Pession25 · Vincenzo Pilone26 · 
Vincenzo Provenzano27 · Cecilia Ricciardi Rizzo28 · Maurizio Santomauro29 · Cristina Segura Garcia30 · 
Federico Spandonaro31 · Samir Sukkar32 · Patrizia Todisco33 · Dario Tuccinardi34 · Andrea Vania35 · Valentina Vanzi36 · 
Riccardo Williams37 · Iris Zani38 · Benedetta Ragghianti39 · Giovanni Antonio Silverii39 · Amanda Belluzzi40 · 
Maria Masulli41 · Maddalena Redini42 · Matteo Monami39
 * Silvio Buscemi 
 silvio.buscemi@unipa.it
1 Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
2 Department of Promozione della Salute, Materno-Infantile, 
Medicina Interna e Specialistica di Eccellenza (PROMISE), 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
3 Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Padua, Italy
4 Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy
5 ASO Città della Salute e della Scienza Hospital Department 
of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Turin, Italy
6 SC Dietetica e Nutrizione Clinica Fondazione IRCCS 
Policlinico San Matteo Pavia, Pavia, Italy
7 Regina Apostolorum Hospital Albano, Rome, Italy
8 UOC Chirurgia Generale e Laparoscopica Ospedale 
Evangelico Betania, Naples, Italy
9 Department of Eating and Weight Disorders, Villa Garda 
Hospital, Garda, Italy
10 Sapienza Università di Roma, Rome, Italy
11 University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Caserta, Italy
12 Dept. of Clinical Medicine and Surgery Unit of Surgical, 
Endoscopy University of Naples Federico II - School 
of Medicine, Naples, Italy
13 UOC Medicina Interna C, Ospedale Maggiore, Bologna, 
Italy
14 Sapienza University of Rome, SM Goretti Hospital, Latin, 
Italy
15 Sant’ Anna Hospital, Como, Italy
16 UOS Medicina legale Centro, Azienda USL di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy
17 Medico di Medina Generale ASST Garda, Brescia, Italy
18 Department of Translation and Precision Medicine 
- Policlinico Universitario Umberto I- Rome, Rome, Italy
19 UOC Pneumologia, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy
20 DU di Patologia Umana DETEV Università di Messina, 
Messina, Italy
21 IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy
22 Dietetica e Nutrizione Clinica, Azienda Ospedaliera 
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy
23 Head of Plastic Surgery Unit and Plastic Reconstructive 
and Aesthetic Surgery, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy
24 Azienda Ospedaliera Regionale “San Carlo”, Ospedale di 
Villa d’ Agri, Potenza, Italy
25 Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Università 
di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
26 Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, Scuola Medicina e 
Chirurgia, Università Degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”, 
Naples, Italy
27 Istituto e Clinica S Chiara, Partinico, Palermo, Italy
28 Department of Public Health, Experimental and Forensic 
Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
29 Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University 
of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
30 Magna Græcia University of Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy
31 Dipartimento di Economia e Istituzioni, University of Rome 
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
 Eating and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity            (2026) 31:9 
    9  Page 14 of 14
32 U.O. Dietetica e Nutrizione Clinica IRCCS Ospedale 
Policlinico San Martino di Genova, Genoa, Italy
33 Psychonutritional Center, Verona, Italy
34 Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, 
Rome, Italy
35 Independent Researcher, Rome, Italy
36 Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca e la Formazione, 
Università degli Studi di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy
37 Dipartimento di Psicologia Dinamica e Clinica, Università 
degli Studi di Roma “Sapienza”, Rome, Italy
38 Amici Obesi Onlus, Milan, Italy
39 Diabetology and Metabolic Disease Unit, Careggi Teaching 
Hospital and University of Florence, Florence, Italy
40 General Surgery Unit, Ospedale S. Maria Della Misericordia, 
Rovigo, Italy
41 University of Naples, Federico II, Naples, Italy
42 Società Italiana Obesità (SIO), Pisa, Italy