Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 649
 
 
 
 
Dietary Guidelines for Chinese Residents (2016):  
comments and comparisons 
 
Shan-shan WANG1, Sovichea LAY1, Hai-ning YU2, Sheng-rong SHEN†‡1 
(1Department of Food Science and Nutrition, College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science,  
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China) 
(2College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310032, China) 
†E-mail: shrshen@zju.edu.cn 
Received July 26, 2016;  Revision accepted Aug. 1, 2016;  Crosschecked Aug. 8, 2016 
 
Abstract:    A high quality diet is believed to play a functional role in promoting the healt hy growth of mankind and 
preventing many kinds of chronic degenerative diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and 
obesity. Adherence to a high quality diet has been strongly a ssociated with a lower risk of mortality. To help promote 
healthy lifestyles and physical strength, the Chinese government has produced a new revised version of the Dietary 
Guidelines for Chinese Residents (2016) and the Chines e Food Pagoda, as guidance for dietary intake among its 
population. Similarly, the Japanese government has produced the Japanese Food Guide Spinning Top Model, and the 
US government has recently published revised dietary reco mmendations in its 2015–2020 eighth edition of Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans. The evidence from all respecti ve cohort studies involved in producing these guidelines 
shows a reduced risk of many chronic diseases and mortalit y if the guidelines are follow ed. All scientific findings 
support encouraging the general populat ion to consume a broad variety of food on the basis of  nutrient and food 
intakes in order to prevent deficiency diseases and a surp lus of energy and nutrients, and recommend daily physical 
activity for health promotion. 
 
Key words:  Dietary guidelines, Chinese Food Pagoda, Japanese Food Guide Spinning Top, Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1631/jzus.B1600341                                CLC number:  TS201.4 
 
 
1  Dietary Guidelines for Chinese Residents 
(2016) 
 
In response to stronger demands for healthy 
growth of Chinese people, the Chinese government 
has produced a new version of the Dietary Guidelines 
for Chinese Residents in the form of the Chinese Food 
Pagoda (Fig. 1) (The Chinese Nutrition Society, 2016). 
The new 2016 dietary pagoda is a revision of the 2007 
Food Pagoda. Compared with the 2007 version, the 
number of guidelines is reduced from ten to six, and 
recipes as well as visual graphics and charts are en-
hanced to make them easy for people to read, under-
stand, accept, and use. The current guidelines consist 
of three parts: the dietary guidelines for general pop-
ulation, the dietary guidelines for specific population, 
and the practice of balanced diet of Chinese residents. 
The dietary guidelines for the general population 
form the core of the guidelines. The six guidelines 
proposed for healthy people over 2 years of age in the 
general population are as follows. 
1.1  Eat a variety of foods, with cereals as the staple 
The daily diet should include cereals, vegetables 
and fruits, livestock and poultry, fish, milk, soy, nuts, 
and other foods. On average, more than twelve kinds 
of food should be consumed daily, and at least  
 
Journal of Zhejiang University-SCIENCE B (Biomedicine & Biotechnology) 
ISSN 1673-1581 (Print); ISSN 1862-1783 (Online) 
www.zju.edu.cn/jzus; www.springerlink.com 
E-mail: jzus@zju.edu.cn
 
Report: 
 
‡ Corresponding author  
 ORCID: Sheng-rong SHEN, http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4096-1693
© Zhejiang University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016 
Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 650
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
twenty-five per week. The daily amount of cereals 
and potatoes consumed for body energy production 
should be 250–400 g, including 50–150 g of whole 
grains and mixed beans and 50–100 g of potatoes. The 
major characteristic of a balance diet pattern is to eat a 
variety of foods with cereals as the staple. 
1.2  Balance eating and exercise to maintain a 
healthy body weight 
People of all ages should know how to select 
foods for healthy eating and should exercise every 
day to maintain energy balance and a healthy weight. 
People should engage in daily physical activities of 
moderate intensity at least five days per week, cor-
responding to a weekly total of at least 150 min. 
Regular physical activity should amount to at least 
6000 steps each day. Avoiding ingesting excessive 
food and physical inactivity is the best way to main-
tain energy balance.  
1.3  Consume plenty of vegetables, milk, and  
soybeans 
Vegetables and fruits are important components 
of a balanced diet; milk and soybean are rich in cal-
cium and protein, respectively. The daily vegetable 
intake should be in the range of 300–500 g. Dark 
vegetables, including spinach, tomato, purple cab-
bage, pak choy, broccoli, and eggplant, should ac-
count for half this amount and should appear in every 
meal. Fruits should be consumed every day. The daily  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intake of fresh fruits, excluding fruit juice, should be 
between 200 and 350 g. A variety of dairy products, 
equivalent to 300 g of liquid milk, should be con-
sumed per day. Bean products and nuts should be 
frequently eaten in an appropriate amount for energy 
and essential oils. 
1.4  Consume an appropriate amount of fish, 
poultry, eggs, and lean meat 
The consumption of fish, poultry, eggs, and meat 
should be in moderation. The appropriate weekly 
intake is set at 280–525 g of fish, 280–525 g of poul-
try, and 280–350 g of eggs with an accumulated daily 
intake of 120–200 g on average. Fish and poultry 
should be chosen preferentially. The yolk should not 
be discarded when consuming eggs, and less fat and 
fewer smoked and cured meat products should be 
eaten. 
1.5  Reduce salt and oil, and limit sugar and alcohol 
Choose to consume less salt and fewer fried 
foods. The daily recommended intake for adults 
should be no more than 6 g of salt and 25–30 g of 
cooking oil. For sugar, the daily intake should be 
properly controlled, and should be less than 50 g, or 
preferably less than 25 g. For trans fatty acids, the 
daily intake should be less than 2 g. To keep the body 
well-hydrated, enough water, corresponding to 7– 
8 cups (1500–1700 ml) for adults, should be con-
sumed every day. The drinking of plain boiled water 
Fig. 1  Food Guide Pagoda for Chinese Residents (Chinese Nutrition Society, 2016) 

Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 651
or tea should be promoted and sugar-sweetened bev-
erages discouraged. Children and pregnant or lactat-
ing women are not encouraged  to drink alcohol. For 
adults, the amount of alcohol consumed per day 
should not exceed 25 g for men and 15 g for women. 
1.6  Eliminate waste and develop a new ethos of 
diet civilization 
Treasure and prepare foods according to the 
need for consumption. Promote separate meals for 
individuals to eliminate waste. Food should be fresh 
and hygienic, and properly handled for cooking. Raw 
and cooked food should be prepared separately. 
Cooked food should be reheated adequately before 
serving. Learn to read food  labels before purchasing. 
Regularly going home and enjoying sharing time with 
family for dinner are the inherent practices of an ex-
cellent culture of diet civilization. 
To help consumers put the guidelines into prac-
tice, the commission proposed a program of daily 
food recommendations and presented these in the 
form of a Food Guide Pagoda (Fig. 1). The pagoda 
illustrates the concept of food classification and the 
recommended daily intake of each of five food groups 
(The Chinese Nutrition Society, 2000). The Food 
Guide Pagoda was designed on the basis of the Die-
tary Guidelines for Chinese Residents. However, the 
specific recommendations are not shown in the pa-
goda. In practical application, the recommendations 
must be adjusted to individual variables, such as 
weight, height, age, sex, and physical activity. 
 
 
2  Importance of dietary guidelines 
 
Nowadays, diet is believed to play a crucial role 
in promoting healthy growth and preventing chronic 
degenerative diseases such  as cancer, diabetes, heart 
disease, obesity, hypertension, hyperglycemia, arte-
riosclerosis, arthritis, and osteoporosis. Rates of these 
diet-related chronic diseases continue to rise and they 
come not only with increased health risks, but also at 
a high cost. For example, around half of all American 
adults, about 117 million individuals, are reported to 
have one or more preventable chronic diseases, in-
cluding cardiovascular disease (CVD), hypertension, 
type 2 diabetes, some cancers, and poor bone health, 
many of which are related to poor quality eating pat-
terns (poor nutrition, tobacco use, and excessive al-
cohol consumption) and physical inactivity. Over 
two-thirds of adults and ne arly one-third of children 
and youth are overweight or obese. In an attempt to 
promote healthy foods to their populations, govern-
ments and health authorities in many countries have 
developed and promulgated dietary guidelines 
(Truswell, 1987).
 The key objective of these guide-
lines is to “provide advice to the general population 
about healthy food choices; therefore, their regular 
diet contributes to a healthy lifestyle and is consistent 
with minimal risk for the development of diet-related 
disease” (National Health and Medical Research 
Council, 1992). Part of the guidelines encourage the 
public to purchase, prepare, and consume food which 
is high in non-digestible dietary fiber, and either 
fat-free or comparatively low in fat, salt, sugar, and 
cholesterol (Turrell, 1997). Increasing evidence from 
prospective cohort studies on diet quality and mor-
tality has demonstrated that higher diet quality scores 
are strongly associated with a lower risk of mortality 
(Kurotani et al., 2016). To promote reasonable nutri-
tion and healthy lifestyles, the dietary guidelines were 
compiled on the basis of the principles of nutrition 
combined with knowledge of the actual national or 
local situation. This approach can help people to 
make wise and appropriate food choices and adjust 
their diet to reduce diet-related chronic diseases and 
keep healthy. Dietary guidelines have important 
guiding significance. Our aim of this article is to 
discuss the recent scientific evidence and develop-
ment of the Chinese, Japanese, and American dietary 
guidelines related to diet quality and mortality.  
 
 
3  Comparison of the dietary guidelines for 
Chinese, Japanese, a nd American popula-
tions (2015–2020) 
 
All foods and numerous beverages contain cal-
ories, and the total number of calories that we use for 
energy in the body differs according to the compo-
nents (proteins, carbohydrates, and fats) in a food. 
The total number of calories that a person needs each 
day varies depending on a number of factors, in-
cluding a person’s age, sex, height, weight, and level 
of physical activity (US Department of Agriculture, 
2015). According to the Chinese Food Pagoda, the 
Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 652
dietary guidelines encourage the general public to 
consume plenty of cereals, tubers, whole grains, 
legumes, vegetables and fruits, meat and poultry, 
aquatic foods, eggs, and dairy products, as well as 
soybean and nuts in moderation, but limited amounts 
of salt and oil. Also, water and physical activity are 
represented coming around the Pagoda. When com-
pared with the previous version of the 2007 Food 
Pagoda, there have been no significant changes  
in dietary recommendations. The recommended 
amounts of fruits, eggs, and meat and poultry have 
slightly decreased, while the amount of aquatic 
products, soybean and nuts has slightly increased. 
Recommendations for the level of physical activity 
and the consumption of other foods are largely un-
changed. However, there is a moderate increase in 
recommended water consumption from 1200 ml to 
between 1500 and 1700 ml per day. This implies that 
the new version encourages the public to drink more 
water for a healthy body. A well-studied report of 
adherence to dietary guidelines and mortality of 
133
 000 Chinese adults in urban Shanghai, conducted 
by Yu et al. (2014), provided significant evidence for 
the effects of the Chinese Food Pagoda (CHFP) on 
diet quality-related health and mortality. The authors 
examined adherence to the 2007 CHFP in association 
with total and cause-specific mortality by comparison 
with the US dietary guidelines: Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) and the Alternative 
Healthy Eating Index (AHE I). The standard energy 
dietary intake was adjusted to 2000 kcal/d (1 kcal= 
4.1868 kJ) and the 2007 CHFP score was designed on 
the basis of the following 5 food groups: (1) grains;  
(2) vegetables and fruits; (3) dairy products, beans, 
and bean products; (4) meat and poultry, fish and 
shrimps, and eggs; and (5) fats and oils and salt. This 
is the first study to assess the mortality risk associated 
with the 2007 Chinese Di etary Guidelines and com-
pare the results with those based on two well-known 
US dietary guidelines (Yu et al., 2014). From the 
results, they demonstrated th at a higher score of ad-
herence to CHFP was associated with reduced mor-
bidity and lower total mortality from major chronic 
diseases, especially CVD, in both men and women 
during mean follow-ups of 6.5 and 12 years. They 
observed decreased risks associated with diet-related 
chronic diseases including CVD and cancer, and re-
duced diabetes mortality, particularly in men. The 
reason for the significantly lower total mortality could 
be that participants strictly adhered to the specific 
recommendations for the consumption of vegetables 
and fruits, legumes, fish, and eggs, even though they 
may not have complied fully with the recommenda-
tions for grains, dairy, meat, fat, and salt. Similarly, a 
higher score based on DASH and AHEI dietary 
guidelines also predicted lower morbidity and mor-
tality from all causes, CVD, and diabetes, but not 
cancer. The authors concluded that a higher compli-
ance with Chinese or US dietary guidelines is linked 
to lower total mortality in Chinese adults. Positive 
associations are more evident in men than in women 
and are more consistent for CVD and diabetes than for 
cancer mortality.  
Recent articles about another prospective study 
on the relationship between the quality of diet and 
mortality based on the Japanese Food Guide Spinning 
Top has provided concrete evidence in support of the 
health benefits from the Japanese Food Dietary 
Guidelines (Oba, 2009; Kurotani et al., 2016). Japa-
nese foods have drawn considerable interest in 
Western countries due to th e low rate of coronary 
heart disease and long life expectancy in Japan (Oba, 
2009). Life expectancy of the Japanese people has 
gradually increased over the last few decades and is 
currently among the longest in the world, particularly 
among Japanese women who, in 2012, had the longest 
life expectancy of 87 years (Kurotani et al. , 2016). 
Kurotani et al. (2016) examined the association be-
tween adherence to the Japanese Food Guide Spin-
ning Top and total and cause-specific mortality. The 
participants were consisted of 36
 624 men and 42 970 
women in the age group from 45 to 75 years who had 
no history of cancer, stroke, ischaemic heart disease, 
or chronic liver disease. The 2005 Japanese Food 
Guide Spinning Top was jointly developed by the 
Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare and 
the Ministry of Agriculture,  Forestry and Fisheries, 
based on the Dietary Guidelines for Japanese. This 
was used as a guide to help the general public choose 
the type and amount of foods they should eat each day 
to promote health. The food guide comprises five 
categories of dishes: grain dishes (rice, bread, and 
noodles), vegetable dishes (vegetables, mushrooms, 
potatoes, and seaweed), fish and meat dishes (meat, 
fish, egg, and soybeans), milk (milk and milk 
by-products), and fruits (fru it and 100% fruit juice) 
Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 653
(Fig. 2). The recommended number of servings of 
each dish and the recommende d total energy intake 
are arranged in relation to sex, age, and level of 
physical activity. The recommended energy intake 
from snacks and alcohol is less than 200 kcal each day. 
From these results, Kurotani et al. (2016) observed 
that a dietary pattern of a high intake of vegetables 
and fruits and adequate intake of fish and meat pro-
moted a significant reduction in the risk of mortality 
from CVD, particularly ce rebrovascular disease. 
According to the data, the Japanese population prefers 
fish to beef and pork unlike Western populations 
which have a balanced nutrient consumption of white 
and red meat. However, the authors indicated a less 
clear association between scores on the Japanese 
Food Guide Spinning Top and cancer deaths in the 
study population. They also highlighted that vegeta-
bles and/or fruits are most likely to protect against 
cancers of the lung, stomach, oesophagus, mouth, 
pharynx, and larynx, whereas milk probably protects 
against colorectal cancer. In contrast, there is con-
vincing evidence that red meat and processed meat 
increase the risk of colorectal cancer. Finally, the 
authors stated that a higher intake of fish and n -3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids is associated with a lower 
risk of myocardial infarction. To sum up, the authors 
concluded that the balance of energy intake of grains, 
vegetables, fruits, meat, fish, eggs, soy products,  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dairy, confectioneries, and alcohol can contribute to 
longevity by reducing the risk of death, mainly from 
CVD, in the Japanese population. 
The 2015–2020 eighth edition of the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, jointly developed by US 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), is 
very interesting in providing key recommendations 
for selecting healthy food choices. It centers on pre-
venting diet-related chronic diseases that afflict peo-
ple (US Department of Agriculture, 2015). The 
guidelines aim to support individuals to improve and 
maintain overall health and to decrease their risk of 
chronic disease through adopting healthier eating 
patterns and making healthy choices in their daily 
lives. The focus is on dise ase prevention, not treat-
ment. At the present time, there is growing concern 
about chronic diseases, including those associated 
with excess weight and obesity, CVD, diabetes, can-
cers, and bone disease, which are becoming more and 
more serious among the American population. For 
example, 65% of adult females and 73% of adult 
males were found to be overweight or obese in 
2009–2012. In 2010, about 85 million men and 
women aged 20 years or more (35% of the population) 
suffered from CVD. In 2012, the prevalence of dia-
betes (type 1 plus type 2) was 14% for men and 11% 
for women aged 20 years or more. Around 10 million  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2  Japanese Food Guide Spinning Top (Ministry of Health, Labour and Welf are and the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries of Japan, 2005) 

Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 654
(10%) adults aged 50 years or more had osteoporosis 
and 43 million (44%) had low bone mass. Therefore, 
to promote a healthy diet to help people avoid the 
diseases of civilization (cancer, diabetes, heart dis-
ease, and obesity), the US  government has charac-
terized five dietary guidelines plus two important key 
recommendations (a healthy eating pattern and 
physical activity) in the eighth edition of the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, 2015–2020 (Fig. 3) (US 
Department of Agriculture, 2015). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The two key recommendations for healthy pat-
terns of eating and physical activity in the newly- 
edited American guidelines are briefly described as 
follows (US Department of Agriculture, 2015): 
1. Key recommendations for a healthy eating 
pattern. All foods and beverages consumed should be 
within a suitable calorie level. A healthy diet gener-
ally comprises a wide range of different vegetables 
from all of the vegetable subgroups such as dark 
green, red and orange, legum es (bean and peas), and 
starchy. Fruits should be consumed either in whole 
form or in 100% fruit juices. Grains should contain 
whole grains (whole kernel) and the consumption of 
refined grains and products processed with refined 
grains should be limited, particularly the consumption 
of processed foods that are high in trans fatty acids, 
added sugars, and/or salt, including cookies, cakes, 
and various snack foods. Recommended dairy prod-
ucts include fat-free or low-fat milk, yoghurt, cheese, 
and/or enriched soy beverages (soymilk). A diversity 
of protein-rich foods is recommended including sea-
food, lean meats and poultry, eggs, legumes (bean and 
peas, and soy), nuts, and seeds. Finally, oils should 
come chiefly from monounsaturated and polyun-
saturated fatty acids. These are usually liquid at room 
temperature and are obtained from a plant source. We 
need to obtain these oils from the diet because our 
body cannot produce them . They are believed to 
provide health benefits because they are the primary 
source of essential fatty acids and vitamin E. How-
ever, we should limit the intake of saturated fats (trans 
fats), added sugars , and salt (sodium). Saturated fats 
and added sugars should each comprise less than 10% 
of daily calories and daily salt consumption should be 
lower than 2300 mg. Alcoholic beverages, if con-
sumed, should be limited to an appropriate volume: a 
maximum of one drink per day for women and two 
drinks per day for men, and restricted to only adults of 
legal drinking age. Coupled with these recommenda-
tions, Americans of all ages should comply with the 
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (US 
Department of Agriculture, 2015) to promote physi-
cal fitness for achieving and maintaining a healthy 
body weight, and simultaneously avoiding the risk of 
chronic disease. The connection between diet and 
physical activity helps balance calorie intake and 
body weight. Therefore, a key recommendation of the 
dietary guidelines includes Physical Activity Guide-
lines for Americans. 
2. Key recommendations to meet the physical 
activity patterns for Americans . Apart from dietary 
consumption, individuals are encouraged to regularly 
exercise for health promotion, according to the prin-
ciples of the Physical Activity Guidelines for Amer-
icans developed by the US Department of Health and 
Human Services. Adults need at least two and a half 
hours of moderate physical activity and should prac-
tice muscle-building exercises at least two days per 
week. Youths between 6 and 17 years of age need at 
least one hour of physical activity every day such as 
aerobic, muscle-strengthening, and bone-strengthening 
Fig. 3  The eighth edition of Dietary Guidelines for Amer-
icans, 2015–2020 (US Department of Agriculture, 2015) 
Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 655
activities. Numerous studies have shown that adher-
ing to the physical activity guidelines can bring many 
health benefits like maintaining a healthy weight, and 
can help achieve weight loss when combined with a 
low calorie diet. Other studies have indicated that the 
risks of premature death, coronary heart disease, 
stroke, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, type 2 diabetes, 
breast and colon cancer, and metabolic syndrome are 
reduced by regular physical activity. Physical activity, 
moreover, can help reduce depression and prevent 
falls. People can choose different types of regular 
physical activity that they like throughout the day for 
a healthy lifestyle (US Department of Agriculture, 
2015).  
There has been no change in MyPlate, a Federal 
Government symbol serving as a reminder for estab-
lishing healthy eating patterns and healthy choices 
across the food groups (Fig. 4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The US dietary guidelines can be defined at the 
molecular level, and related to specific behavior ori-
entation, unlike the Dietary Guidelines for Chinese 
citizens. Western food can be more precisely defined 
because it is easier to quantify and its processing can 
more easily be standardized. The accuracy of dietary 
guidelines and people’s understanding of them are 
often contradictory, which is why the advice and 
recommendations in the dietary guidelines for most 
countries in the world are at the food species level 
rather than based on nutrition. A more macro “cui-
sine” concept launched in the form of the Japanese 
Food Guide Spinning Top, may better suit Chinese 
citizens who have the same eating habits and cooking 
methods as the Japanese. 
 
 
4  Conclusions 
 
We found that all the dietary guidelines exam-
ined have been consistently associated with a lower 
risk of many chronic diseases. Scientific findings 
encourage the general population to consume a broad 
variety of different food sources on the basis of nu-
trient and food intake to prevent deficiency diseases 
and a surplus of energy and nutrients. Daily physical 
activity is also encouraged for healthy growth and 
physical strength. For instance, the Chinese Food 
Pagoda suggests people do at least 6000 steps a day. 
Strong evidence demonstrates that higher intakes of 
vegetables and fruits provide a lot of health benefits. 
Whole grains may also contribute, though with 
slightly less consistency. However, there is growing 
scientific evidence that added sugar, trans fatty acids 
(saturated fats), and table salt provide serious threats 
to our health and theref ore should be minimally 
consumed. Many health organizations agree that sat-
urated fat and sugar should constitute less than 10% 
of total calories and salt consumption should be no 
more than 2300 mg per day. From a personal point of 
view, we also strongly encourage people to drink 
more water and keep bottled water nearby because 
where there is water, there will be life! 
 
Compliance with ethics guidelines 
Shan-shan WANG, Sovichea LAY, Hai-ning YU, and 
Sheng-rong SHEN declare that they have no conflict of interest. 
This article does not contai n any studies with human or 
animal subjects performed by any of the authors. 
 
References 
The Chinese Nutrition Society, 2000. Dietary Guidelines and 
the Food Guide Pagoda. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. , 100(8): 
886-887. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0002-8223(00)00257-1 
The Chinese Nutrition Society, 2016. The Food Guide Pagoda 
for Chinese Residents. Available from http://dg.cnsoc.org/ 
upload/images/source/20160519163856103.jpg [Accessed 
on June 20, 2016] (in Chinese). 
Kurotani, K., Akter, S., Kashino, I., et al., 2016. Quality of diet 
and mortality among Japanese  men and women: Japan 
Public Health Center based prospective study.  BMJ, 352: 
i1209.  
Fig. 4  Implementation of th e dietary guidelines through 
MyPlate (US Department of Agriculture, 2015) 
Wang et al. / J Zhejiang Univ-Sci B (Biomed & Biotechnol)   2016 17(9):649-656 656
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i1209 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare and the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fish eries of Japan, 2005. Jap-
anese Food Guide Spinning Top. Available from 
http://www.maff.go.jp/j/balance_guide/b_use/pdf/eng_reiari. 
pdf [Accessed on June 30, 2016]. 
National Health and Medical Research Council, 1992. Dietary 
Guidelines for Australians. Australian Government  
Publishing, Canberra. 
Oba, S., Nagata, C., Nakamura, K., et al., 2009. Diet based on 
the Japanese Food Guide Spinning Top and subsequent 
mortality among men and wome n in a general Japanese 
population. J. Am. Diet Assoc., 109(9):1540-1547. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jada.2009.06.367 
Truswell, A.S., 1987. Evolution of the dietary recommenda-
tions, goals and guidelines. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 45(Suppl. 5): 
1060-1072. 
Turrell, G., 1997. Determinants of gender differences in die-
tary behavior. Nutr. Res., 17(7):1105-1120. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0271-5317(97)00082-1 
US Department of Agriculture, 2015. Dietary Guidelines  
for Americans 2015–2020, 8th Edition. Available from 
http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines [Ac-
cessed on June 20, 2016]. 
Yu, D.X., Zhang, X.L., Xiang, Y.B., et al., 2014. Adherence to 
dietary guidelines and mortality: a report from prospec-
tive cohort studies of 134,000 Chinese adults in urban  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 100(2):693-700. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.079194
 
 
 
中文概要 
 
题 目：中国居民膳食指南（2016）：评价和比较  
概要 ： 高质量的膳食在促进人类健康成长和防治包括癌
症、心血管疾病、糖尿病和肥胖在内的多种慢性
疾病中起着重要的作用。 坚持高质量的膳食能有
效地降低死亡率。为了帮助形成健康的生活方
式，增强体质，中国政府发布了新的中国居民膳
食指南（2016）和膳食宝塔，用来指导居民膳食
的摄入。同样，日本政府早期发布了日本膳食指
南陀螺模型， 美国政府最近也出版了修订后的第
八版美国居民膳食指南（2015–2020）。与指南
相关的同期证据表明，遵循指南进行膳食指导，
许多慢性疾病的发病率和死亡率都会降低。 所有
的科学发现支持鼓励居民在保证营养和食物摄
入的基础上消耗各种各样的食物以防止营养缺
乏疾病以及能量和营养过剩， 并且建议进行日常
活动来保持身体健康。 
关键词：膳食指南；中国膳食宝塔；日本膳食指南陀螺模
型；美国居民膳食指南