ARTICLE OPEN
Pediatrics
Core outcome set for early intervention trials to prevent obesity
in childhood (COS-EPOCH): Agreement on “what” to measure
Vicki Brown 1,2 ✉, Marj Moodie 1,2, Marufa Sultana 1, Kylie E. Hunter 2,3, Rebecca Byrne 2,4, Anna Lene Seidler 2,3, Rebecca Golley 2,5,
Rachael W. Taylor 2,6, Kylie D. Hesketh 2,7 and Karen Matvienko-Sikar 8
© The Author(s) 2022
BACKGROUND: Heterogeneity in the outcomes collected and reported in trials of interventions to prevent obesity in the ﬁrst ﬁve
years of life highlights the need for a core outcome set to streamline intervention evaluation and synthesis of effects. This study
aimed to develop a core outcome set for use in early childhood obesity prevention intervention studies in children from birth to
ﬁve years of age (COS-EPOCH).
METHODS: The development of the core outcome set followed published guidelines and consisted of three stages: (1) systematic
scoping review of outcomes collected and reported in early childhood obesity prevention trials; (2) e-Delphi study with
stakeholders to prioritise outcomes; (3) meeting with stakeholders to reach consensus on outcomes. Stakeholders included parents/
caregivers of children aged ≤ ﬁve years, policy-makers/funders, researchers, health professionals, and community and
organisational stakeholders interested in obesity prevention interventions.
RESULTS: Twenty-two outcomes from nine outcome domains (anthropometry, dietary intake, sedentary behaviour, physical
activity, sleep, outcomes in parents/caregivers, environmental, emotional/cognitive functioning, economics) were included in the
core outcome set: infant tummy time; child diet quality, dietary intake, fruit and vegetable intake, non-core food intake, non-core
beverage intake, meal patterns, weight-based anthropometry, screentime, time spent sedentary, physical activity, sleep duration,
wellbeing; parent/caregiver physical activity, sleep and nutrition parenting practices; food environment, sedentary behaviour or
physical activity home environment, family meal environment, early childhood education and care environment, household food
security; economic evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: The systematic stakeholder-informed study identi ﬁed the minimum outcomes recommended for collection and
reporting in early childhood obesity prevention trials. Future work will investigate the recommended instruments to measure each
of these outcomes. The core outcome set will standardise guidance on the measurement and reporting of outcomes from early
childhood obesity prevention interventions, to better facilitate evidence comparison and synthesis, and maximise the value of data
collected across studies.
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867–1874; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41366-022-01198-w
INTRODUCTION
Childhood obesity is a global concern, with an estimated 39
million children under the age of ﬁve living with overweight or
obesity in 2020 [ 1]. Short-term physical and psychological health
problems associated with obesity in childhood include asthma,
sleep apnoea, high blood pressure and lower health-related
quality of life [ 2, 3]. Obesity in childhood is a strong predictor of
obesity in adulthood, with the associated risk for a number of
conditions, including type 2 diabetes, some cancers and
cardiovascular disease [ 1]. Given the high prevalence of over-
weight or obesity in young children, there is a clear need for early
intervention, to ensure children attain and maintain a healthy
growth trajectory during the early years and to reduce the huge
social, health and economic burden [ 4].
A growing number of early childhood obesity prevention trials
are being conducted worldwide [ 5]. However heterogeneity in the
outcomes collected and reported in efforts to synthesise the study
ﬁndings of these interventions is hindering the understanding of
what interventions work best, for whom and through which
mechanisms [ 6]. Core outcome sets (COS) are agreed minimum
sets of outcomes recommended for measurement and reporting
in studies in speci ﬁc health areas to allow cross study comparison
Received: 16 June 2022 Revised: 18 July 2022 Accepted: 19 July 2022
Published online: 4 August 2022
1Deakin University, Deakin Health Economics, Institute for Health Transformation, Global Obesity Centre (GLOBE), School of Health and Social Devel opment, Geelong, VIC 3220,
Australia. 2Centre for Research Excellence in the Early Prevention of Obesity in Childhood, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 3NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University
of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 4Queensland University of Technology, School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 5Caring Futures Institute, College of
Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5042, Australia. 6Department of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. 7Deakin University, Institute
for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Geelong, VIC 3220, Australia. 8School of Public Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. ✉email: victoria.brown@deakin.edu.au
www.nature.com/ijoInternational Journal of Obesity
1234567890();,:
of ﬁndings [ 7]. The development and use of COS can reduce
outcome heterogeneity and research waste, and improve evalua-
tion and synthesis of intervention effects. Further, the process of
COS development involves key stakeholders at all stages, thus
ensuring that COS are relevant and appropriate for speci ﬁc health
areas in which they will be used [ 7].
A COS has been developed to identify a minimum outcome set
for infant feeding interventions; [ 8, 9] it identi ﬁed twenty-six
outcomes, across nine outcome domains that should be reported
in trials of interventions targeting infant feeding as a strategy to
prevent obesity in children ≤ 1 year old [ 8]. Given the complex and
multi-faceted aetiology of childhood obesity [ 10], the develop-
ment of a COS that can be more broadly applied to prevention
interventions for children aged from birth to ﬁve years and that
span a wider range of risk factors is warranted [ 11]. Considering a
broader range of outcomes is important, given that multiple long-
term behaviours are established in the infancy and preschool
period of a child ’s life, and interventions often incorporate
multiple behaviour targets. This study therefore aimed to develop
the Core Outcome Set for Early intervention trials to Prevent
Obesity in CHildhood (COS-EPOCH); for trials of early childhood
obesity prevention interventions in children aged from birth to
ﬁve years, with lifestyle-related components targeting a broad
range of relevant risk factors (e.g. diet, physical activity, sedentary
behaviour, sleep, parent/caregiver practices) and conducted
across a range of relevant settings (e.g. community, home, early
childhood education and care [ECEC]).
METHODS
The study is registered on the Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials
(COMET) Initiative registry of COS (registration number 1679, http://
www.comet-initiative.org/Studies/Details/1679). Development of the COS
followed the Core Outcome Set-STAnd ards for Development (COS-STAD)
recommendations [7, 12]. Reporting of the COS follows the Core Outcome Set-
STAndards for Reporting (COS-STAR Statement; Supplementary Table S1) [13].
The study was undertaken between June 2020 and March 2022 in three
stages:
Stage 1 - A systematic scoping review of randomised controlled trials
(RCTs) of early childhood obesity prevention interventions to identify
outcomes reported in existing trials; [ 14]
Stage 2- An e-Delphi study to elicit views on the importance of potential
COS outcomes from key stakeholders;
Stage 3- An online consensus meeting with key stakeholders to ﬁnalise
the core outcome set.
An international Steering Group, chaired by the lead author (VB) and
comprised of eight experts in the ﬁeld of early childhood obesity
prevention interventions, provided expert oversight and guided the
development of the COS in all stages. Steering Group members were
invited via the lead author ’s professional networks, and membership to the
Steering Group was designed to incorporate expertise across the range of
risk factors and settings pertinent to early childhood obesity prevention
intervention. Steering Group members had expertise in health economics,
psychology, pediatric public health, behavioural epidemiology, public
health nutrition, physical activity and sedentary behaviour, sleep, biosta-
tistics and evidence synthesis. Ethical consent was obtained from the
Deakin University Human Research Ethics Committee (HEAG-H 231_2020).
Systematic scoping review
In order to develop the COS-EPOCH, a systematic scoping review was ﬁrst
undertaken to identify commonly collected and reported outcomes from
early childhood obesity prevention interventions [ 11, 14]. A brief overview
of the scoping review methods is provided here, with further details
available in the full publication [ 14]. Publicly available clinical trial registries
(clinicaltrials.gov and via the World Health Organisation International
Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP)) and Ovid Medline were
systematically searched, using pre-de ﬁned search strategies [ 14]. The
clinical trial registry search was supplemented by a review and update of a
recently published Cochrane review including obesity prevention inter-
vention RCTs in children aged under ﬁve years [ 5].
Studies were included if they were RCTs of interventions starting
antenatally to child age ﬁve years and aimed to prevent childhood
overweight or obesity, with a component related to lifestyle (e.g., diet,
physical activity, sedentary behaviour, sleep, parent/caregiver practices).
Potential studies were screened by two independent reviewers (VB, MS),
and a data extraction tool was developed in Microsoft Excel following
COMET recommendations [7]. A deductive iterative approach was followed
to categorise the conceptualisation of outcome domains and outcomes
and reach agreement on ﬁnal outcomes and de ﬁnitions, with the
participation and agreement of all Steering Group members. Findings of
the review are available elsewhere [ 14].
e-Delphi study
A three-round e-Delphi survey was conducted to achieve convergence of
opinion from key stakeholders on the importance of outcomes identi ﬁed
in the scoping review, following published guidelines (Supplementary
Table S2) [ 7, 15]. Given the potential for a large number of outcomes to be
identiﬁed in the scoping review, and recent evidence suggesting that
Delphi studies that included a higher number of items had signi ﬁcantly
lower response rates [ 16], decision rules for inclusion of outcomes into the
e-Delphi survey were developed a priori in agreement with the Steering
Group. Outcomes were omitted if they were dietary intake or feeding
outcomes from interventions in infants aged ≤ 1 year, as the COS-EPOCH is
designed to be complementary to the published COS for early infant
feeding interventions [ 8]. Outcomes were also omitted for inclusion into
the e-Delphi survey if they were not clearly speci ﬁed (for example,
reported as ‘changes in health behaviours ’), study-related (for example,
feasibility or ﬁdelity outcomes) or if the scoping review results suggested
they were included in only one of the 161 included studies [ 14]. To further
reduce the burden on e-Delphi study participants, several outcomes were
merged (for example, ‘height’ and ‘weight’ were merged with ‘body mass
index’ into ‘weight-based anthropometry’), following consultation and full
agreement with the Steering Group.
Early childhood obesity prevention intervention stakeholder groups
were identi ﬁed in conjunction with the Steering Group as: (i) policy-
makers/funders, (ii) parents/caregivers, (iii) researchers, (iv) health profes-
sionals, and (v) community and organisational stakeholders interested in
obesity prevention interventions (for instance, representatives from
settings where interventions are undertaken such as Maternal Child
Health centres, ECEC, health promotion organisations). Although there is
no consensus on the number of participants or rounds required for a
Delphi study [ 17, 18], the study aimed to recruit a sample size of 30
participants per stakeholder group ( n = 150). This sample size was based
on a recent study investigating attrition between two rounds of Delphi
surveys that estimated that the overall response rate ranges from 45% to
100%, but is typically 80% or higher [ 16]. Assuming attrition of between
20% and 55%, this would result in between 9 and 19 participants per
stakeholder group at the end of three rounds (approximately 45 –96 full
completions by the end of round three).
Potential study participants were recruited over a four-week period, from
27 August 2021. A four-week sponsored social media campaign using
Facebook and Instagram invited parents/caregivers to click on a link to learn
more about the study and participate after giving consent. Inclusion criteria
for parents/caregivers included having at least one child aged from birth to
ﬁve years; being ﬂuent in English; and being able to freely give informed
consent. A list of potential participants from all other stakeholder groups
(policy-makers/funders, researchers, health professionals, and community
and organisational stakeholders) was compiled using internet sources, the
published literature and publicly available information. Potential researcher
participants were identi ﬁed by searching Scopus and Google Scholar
databases for publications using relevant keywords related to early
childhood obesity prevention, and sourcing author contact details either
from academic papers or institutional websites. Health professional contacts
were also sourced using academic literature, the websites of relevant
conferences and professional organisations. Publicly available websites for
ECEC settings, health promotion and advocacy organisations were used to
identify potential community and organisational stakeholders for obesity
prevention interventions. Potential policy-maker and funder participants
were identi ﬁed through searches of relevant government websites (e.g.,
Departments of Health), philanthropic organisations and the World Health
Organization European Childhood Obesity Surveillance Initiative (WHO COSI)
website. Personalised emails with study information were sent to all
potential participants, with a follow-up email sent after seven days if no
response was received. Participants were invited to forward study details on
to any colleagues they thought may be interested to contribute to the study.
Outcomes were presented in the e-Delphi questionnaire by outcome
domain, with the ordering of domains (and outcomes per domain)
V. Brown et al.
1868
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
randomised to minimise response bias; a plain language de ﬁnition of each
outcome was provided. The questionnaire was pilot tested with the
Steering Group and a convenience sample of non-academic parents/
caregivers ( n = 7) prior to study launch, and feedback to improve the
comprehension of the study aims and de ﬁnitions of outcomes was
incorporated. Participants in the e-Delphi were asked to rate the
importance of each outcome based on a Likert scale anchored between
1 and 9 based on GRADE, where 1 –3 signiﬁes an outcome that is ‘not that
important’,4 –6 ‘important but not critical ’ and 7 –9 ‘critically important ’
[19]. At the end of round 1, participants were also asked to list any
additional outcomes they felt should be included in the survey and these
were considered for inclusion in round 2 by the Steering Group.
Responses were analysed both within and between groups of
stakeholders (group mean, median, strength of agreement using mean
absolute deviation from the median (MADM) [ 20]). Levels of agreement
using the MADM were de ﬁned using values from the literature (low > 1.41;
moderate 1.08 –1.41; high < 1.08) [ 20] and criteria for inclusion and
exclusion of outcomes was pre-de ﬁned [ 21, 22] (Table 1). During
subsequent rounds of the survey, participants received a summary of
their individual responses for the previous round and a graphical depiction
of the distribution of scores by stakeholder group. An example of this
graphical feedback from round 1 of the study is given in Supplementary
Fig. S1. Participants were then invited to review and re-rate outcomes.
Outcomes that reached consensus to not be included as a core outcome
by the end of round 2 were not brought forward to round 3. Attrition bias
was examined to explore whether participant withdrawal from later rounds
could be attributed to holding views not shared by the majority of
stakeholder group peers [ 23]. This was done by analysing the mean
response and response distributions across all outcome scores between
participants completing only round 1 of the survey with participants who
completed all rounds [ 7, 23]. The e-Delphi was conducted in DelphiMa-
nager Software and all participants provided consent to participate before
being directed to the round 1 survey [ 24].
Consensus meeting
The results of the e-Delphi were presented to the Steering Group in
February 2022, and feedback was provided on the recruitment and
preparation for the consensus meeting to ﬁnalise the COS. Participants who
completed round 3 of the e-Delphi survey were invited by email to
participate in a half-day virtual consensus meeting held in March 2022. The
consensus meeting utilised a nominal group technique (NGT) to discuss the
results of the e-Delphi survey and to agree on a ﬁnal COS [ 7]. NGT was
selected as it enables consensus in a way that emphasizes the
consideration of all participants ’ views equally [ 25]. While a NGT does not
depend on statistical power [ 26], we aimed to recruit a minimum of two
and a maximum of four representatives from each stakeholder group to
participate in the meeting (i.e., between ten and twenty participants total).
The consensus meeting was chaired by an experienced, external
facilitator who was not known to any of the participants. Prior to the
meeting, participants were emailed a guide to the consensus meeting,
which outlined meeting access requirements, a point of contact for
trouble-shooting, and a summary of the COS process and the NGT
technique, based on the COMET Core Outcome Set and NGT plain
language summaries [ 27].
At the start of the meeting the background and aims of the study and a
lay de ﬁnition of a COS were presented. Next, participants were presented
with, and then discussed, the outcomes for which consensus for inclusion
and exclusion had been reached in the e-Delphi process. Outcomes which
had not reached consensus in the e-Delphi were then presented, and
participants voted each outcome as ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for inclusion in the COS.
Voting was undertaken electronically and anonymously, using Mentimeter
[28]. The results of the ﬁrst round of voting were brie ﬂy discussed before
participants voted a second and ﬁnal time. Outcomes which reached
consensus to include ( ≥ 75% or more of participants rated as ‘yes’ for
inclusion) were presented and discussed a ﬁnal time, to ﬁnalise the COS. A
ﬁnal vote on whether the COS was agreed to and supported by all
participants was then undertaken.
RESULTS
Systematic scoping review
The scoping review identiﬁed 18 outcome domains, from a total of
161 included studies: ‘anthropometry’, ‘dietary intake ’, ‘feeding’,
‘physical activity ’, ‘sedentary behaviour ’, ‘sleep’, ‘perceptions and
preferences’, ‘motor skill development ’, ‘emotional functioning/
wellbeing’, ‘cognitive/executive functioning’, ‘parenting practices ’,
‘environmental’, ‘blood and lymphatic system’, ‘oral health’, ‘quality
of life ’, ‘economic’, ‘study-related’, ‘other’ [14]. In these domains,
221 unique outcomes were identi ﬁed [ 14], representing an
unrealistic number of outcomes for inclusion in the e-Delphi
process given the potential for high participant burden. Following
consultation and agreement with the Steering Group based on the
a-priori decision rules, a total of 112 outcomes were included in the
ﬁrst round of the e-Delphi survey (Fig. 1; Supplementary Table S3).
e-Delphi study
Round 1 of the e-Delphi study opened in August 2021, with 206
participants from 25 different countries (Table 2). A summary of
e-Delphi results by stakeholder group and round are presented in
Supplementary Table S4. In round 1, ﬁ
ve outcomes reached
consensus for inclusion in the COS: ‘child time spent sedentary ’,
‘child physical activity’, ‘child diet quality’, ‘child dietary intake’ and
‘household food security ’.
An additional 78 outcomes were suggested by round 1
participants. Additional proposed outcomes were reviewed and
after consultation with the Steering Group, an additional seven
outcomes that were deemed substantively different to already
included outcomes were included in subsequent rounds (Supple-
mentary Table S3).
Round 2 had 143 participants (69% of Round 1 participants).
Round 2 participants re-rated all round 1 outcomes and also rated
the seven additional outcomes suggested in round 1 (Supple-
mentary Table S3). In round 2, six outcomes reached consensus for
inclusion in the COS: the ﬁve outcomes that had reached
consensus in round 1 ( ‘child time spent sedentary ’, ‘child physical
activity’, ‘child diet quality ’, ‘child dietary intake ’, ‘household food
security’) plus ‘parent/caregiver role modelling of healthy eating ’
(Supplementary Table S4). No outcomes met the consensus
criteria to exclude as a core outcome, and so all outcomes were
again brought forward to round 3 of the e-Delphi survey.
In round 3, 96 participants re-rated 119 outcomes (47% of
round 1 participants; 67% of round 2 participants). In round 3, ten
outcomes reached consensus for inclusion in the COS: the six
outcomes that had reached consensus in round 2 ( ‘child time
spent sedentary ’, ‘child physical activity ’, ‘child diet quality ’, ‘child
dietary intake ’, ‘household food security ’, ‘parent/caregiver role
modelling of healthy eating ’) plus ‘child screen time ’, ‘sedentary
behaviour or physical activity home environment ’, ‘child non-core
beverages intake
’ and ‘food environment ’(Supplementary Tables
S4, S5). Analysis of the distribution of scores across all outcomes,
comparing between the scores of participants who only
completed round 1 versus participants who completed all rounds
suggests that participants who completed the study scored the
outcomes similarly to those who withdrew or dropped out from
Table 1. Outcome inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Consensus to include as a core
outcome
≥ 75% of participants in each stakeholder group score the outcome as ‘critically important’ AND < 15%
of participants in each stakeholder group score the outcome as ‘not that important ’.
Consensus to not include as a core
outcome
≥ 75% of participants in each stakeholder group score the outcome as ‘not that important ’ AND < 15%
of participants in each stakeholder group score the outcome as ‘critically important ’.
No consensus All other combinations
V. Brown et al.
1869
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
the study (Supplementary Fig. S1). No outcomes met the
consensus criteria to exclude as a core outcome. All outcomes
were therefore carried forward to the consensus meeting.
Consensus meeting
Nine stakeholders participated in the online consensus meeting:
two policy-makers, two researchers, two parents/caregivers, one
health professional and two community or organisational stake-
holders. Participants were from Australia ( n = 8) and the South
Paciﬁc( n = 1). Eight participants were female, with one male
participant. After presentation and discussion of the outcomes, 22
were voted as critical for inclusion in the COS (Table 3). Following
discussion by all participants and group consensus, ‘parent/
caregiver role modelling of healthy eating ’ was reworded as a
subset of ‘parent/caregiver nutrition parenting practices ’.
DISCUSSION
The ﬁnalised COS-EPOCH includes 22 outcomes that should be
measured and reported in trials of early childhood obesity
prevention interventions commencing in children aged from birth
to 5 years. The six core outcomes related to dietary intake
complement the outcomes included in an existing COS for early
infant feeding interventions in the ﬁrst year of life, that has already
been published [ 8]. The COS-EPOCH provides additional guidance
to researchers and trialists on the dietary intake domain outcomes
for collection and reporting in trials in children aged from 1 up to
5 years. The COS-EPOCH also includes a further 16 outcomes
related to eight outcome domains (anthropometry, sedentary
behaviour, physical activity, sleep, outcomes in parents/caregivers,
environmental, emotional or cognitive functioning, economic).
This means COS now cover all key domains relevant to obesity
prevention, as identi ﬁed by relevant international stakeholders,
and facilitates consistent and comprehensive assessment of
outcomes to enable comparison between early childhood obesity
prevention interventions.
It is well-recognised that the determinants and drivers of
childhood obesity are complex, and that interventions must
Table 2. Participant characteristics per Delphi round.
Round 1 Round 2 Round 3
nn (response
rate R1)
n (response
rate R2)
Stakeholder group
Researchers 85 69 (81%) 52 (75%)
Parents or caregivers 32 14 (44%) 8 (57%)
Health professionals 47 33 (70%) 18 (55%)
Policy-makers or
funders
20 16 (80%) 11 (69%)
Community or
organisational
stakeholders
22 11 (50%) 7 (64%)
Total 206 143 (69%) 96 (67%)
Gender
Female 185 127 83
Male 21 16 13
Place of residence
Australasia
Australia 105 66 45
New Zealand 3 3 1
Fiji 1 1 0
Europe
United Kingdom 23 21 11
Ireland 10 4 2
Netherlands 5 5 3
Sweden 5 5 5
Norway 4 3 2
Bulgaria 1 0 0
France 1 1 1
Georgia 1 1 1
Macedonia 1 1 1
Moldova 1 0 0
Poland 1 1 1
Asia
Israel 4 2 1
Hong Kong 1 1 1
Indonesia 1 0 0
Kazakhstan 1 1 0
Malaysia 1 1 1
Singapore 1 1 1
North America
United States of
America
28 22 16
Canada 2 0 0
Guatemala 1 0 0
South America
Brazil 1 0 0
Africa
South Africa 3 3 3
R1 = Round 1, R2 = Round 2, R3 = Round 3.
Phase 1: 
Outcome iden/g415ﬁca/g415on
Scoping review, synthesising outcomes collected and reported 
in early childhood obesity preven/g415on interven/g415ons
18 outcome domains
221 outcomes
Consensus mee/g415ng, March 2022
n= 9 par/g415cipants
COS of 22 outcomes
Phase 2:
eDelphi study
Phase 3: 
Consensus
109 outcomes merged or omi/g425ed through expert advisory 
group agreement
27 Aug-27 Sep 21Round 1
112 outcomes
n=206 par/g415cipants
13 Oct-05 Nov 21Round 2
119 outcomes
n=143 par/g415cipants
26 Nov- 17 Dec 21
Round 3
119 outcomes
n=96 par/g415cipants
7 addi/g415onal outcomes added
Figure notes: COS= Core outcome set. Dec= December. Aug= August. Nov= November. 
Oct= October. Sep= September.
Fig. 1 COS EPOCH development process.
V. Brown et al.
1870
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
Table 3. Final core outcome set outcomes, by outcome domain.
Outcome Outcome domain Outcome de ﬁnition
Child weight-based
anthropometry
Anthropometry Includes child height, weight, body mass index (BMI), BMI z-score,
percentile, prevalence of overweight and obesity, weight for height
or length.
Child diet quality Dietary intake* (in children aged
from 1 to 5 years)
Includes child ’s diet quality in relation to the proportion of less
healthy foods in relation to overall energy intake, the proportion of
healthy foods in relation to overall energy intake, the intake of
nutrients compared to dietary guideline recommendations, the
intake of a healthy dietary pattern, the change in healthy meals
consumed.
Child dietary intake Includes quantity or frequency of child ’s general dietary intake.
Child fruit and vegetable intake Includes quantity or frequency of child ’s consumption of fruits and/
or vegetables.
Child non-core food intake Includes quantity or frequency of child ’s consumption of processed
snack foods, energy dense sweets (e.g., chocolate bars, ice cream),
high caloric foods, savoury snacks, discretionary calories, french
fries, fast or deep-fried foods.
Child non-core beverages intake Includes quantity or frequency of consumption of sodas, soft
drinks, sugar-sweetened beverages, juices, cordials, high caloric
drinks by the child.
Child meal patterns Includes child meal times and snack patterns, including the
number and/or timing of meals per day.
Child screen time Sedentary behaviour Includes time spent by the child watching DVDs, TV, videos or
using computers, tablets, smart phones or other portable
electronic devices.
Child time spent sedentary Includes time spent by the child sitting, lying awake, immobile but
awake, or with no trunk movement. Includes time spent in
restricted movement (e.g., in a car seat or a stroller). Does not
include time asleep or screen time.
Child physical activity Physical activity Includes frequency or time spent by the child in physical activity,
including total physical activity, moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity, leisure physical activity, walking, crawling. Includes
organised physical activity (e.g., frequency or time spent by the
child at sport, dance, swimming) and unorganised physical activity
(e.g., frequency of time spent by the child in energetic play, play,
active play, running, jumping, climbing, structured free play or
common play activities, frequency or time spent by the child at the
park, playground, excursions).
Infant tummy time Includes commencement age, frequency and/or time spent by the
infant in tummy time. Speci ﬁcally for trials involving infants.
Child sleep duration Sleep Includes child sleep quantity, hours of total daily sleep duration,
total minutes of sleep in 24-hour period, the average length of a
sleep bout and duration of individual sleep bouts, average night-
time sleep, sleep hours per night, sleep consecutive hours at night,
rate of sleeping through the night.
Parent/caregiver physical activity
parenting practices
Outcomes in parents/caregivers Includes parent/caregiver rules and practices, intentions or habit
strength for activity behaviours, co-participation and role-
modelling.
Parent/caregiver sleep parenting
practices
Includes parent/caregiver rules and practices for sleep, bedtime or
sleep routine, assistance to sleep by touching, intervening when
awake in the night.
Parent/caregiver nutrition
parenting practices
Includes parent/caregiver rules and practices for nutrition and/or
feeding, trying new foods, intentions or habit strength for nutrition
behaviours, role-modelling.
Food environment Environmental Includes environments in which food is consumed, available,
purchased, available to be purchased. Includes proximity to food
store locations, the distribution of food store locations, accessibility
and convenience of food sources.
Household food security Reliable access to healthy and nutritious foods.
Family meal environment Includes features of the environment where meals are eaten.
Includes frequency of eating meals together as a family, media or
device use at family meals, eating at dining table or similar.
Sedentary behaviour or physical
activity home environment
Includes features of the home environment that may in ﬂuence
sedentary behaviour or physical activity, including ﬁxed and non-
V. Brown et al.
1871
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
address different layers of the ecological model (e.g., child,
caregiver, environment, community/policy) to in ﬂuence health
and wellbeing [ 29]. This is re ﬂected in the COS-EPOCH, with the
inclusion of outcomes related to energy balance behaviours at the
individual level (e.g., physical activity, sleep duration, dietary
intake), outcomes in parents/caregivers re ﬂecting the family/social
level (e.g., parent/caregiver nutrition, physical activity and sleep
parenting practices), and environmental and policy-relevant
outcomes (e.g., early childhood education and care (ECEC)
environment, economic evaluation). While the COS-EPOCH
includes 22 outcomes for collection and reporting, some trialist
discretion is recommended to tailor its application to speci ﬁc
needs. For instance, while the COS-EPOCH recommends the
collection and reporting of infant tummy time this may not be
relevant for an intervention beginning at child age of 4 years.
Similarly, the collection and reporting of outcomes from all
domains may be deemed less appropriate to an intervention that
focuses only on a subset of energy balance behaviours. In
addition, for some trials the collection and reporting of 22
outcomes may not be feasible given study resourcing limitations.
In these instances trialists should at a minimum be able to justify
why they have not collected and reported outcomes across all
COS-EPOCH domains, and why they have not measured certain
outcomes.
This study followed published best-practice guidelines for the
development and reporting of COS [ 7, 13]. Strengths of the study
included concordance with a published study protocol [ 11], and
participation of international participants in the e-Delphi and
consensus meeting. While a large number of countries were
represented in the e-Delphi, it should be noted that the majority
of participants were from Australia, followed by the United
Kingdom and United States of America. The use of a professional
facilitator for the consensus meeting avoided researcher bias or
undue in ﬂuence on the ﬁnalised COS, and ensured that all
stakeholders could freely express their views during COS
development [ 7]. The Steering Group providing expert oversight
and guiding the development of the COS comprised experts in
the ﬁeld of early childhood obesity prevention interventions. The
Steering Group was at all times guided by published guidance on
COS development [ 7] and did not participate in either the Delphi
study or consensus meeting, minimising researcher bias or undue
inﬂuence on the ﬁnalised COS. The publication of a pre-de ﬁned
study protocol [ 11], which outlined the research design, the
decision points and the decision rules used to develop the COS
also sought to minimise any undue in ﬂuence of the Steering
Group. While a limitation of this study is the absence of a non-
academic stakeholder member to the Steering Group, the voices
of non-academics and end users/bene ﬁciaries (e.g. policy-makers,
parents) were represented in the project ﬁndings as study
participants. The timeline of the study meant that participant
recruitment and engagement with the e-Delphi study and the
consensus meeting occurred during periods of COVID19
pandemic-related disruption and so the use of virtual technologies
was a signi ﬁcant strength of the study. Perhaps due to this
pandemic-related disruption, e-Delphi participation from some
stakeholder groups, and in particular parents/caregivers, was
lower than expected. Two parents/caregivers were however able
to participate in the virtual consensus meeting, and the use of the
experienced facilitator ensured that their voices were able to be
heard in the consensus process [ 7]. While the use of technologies
allowed for international participation in COS development, the
virtual consensus meeting was conducted in Australia and this
likely restricted participation due to time zone differences for
many potential participants located in other hemispheres. The
Australian-centric nature of the virtual consensus meeting is also a
limitation of this study. Finally, while e-Delphi and consensus
participants came from a total of 25 countries, more investigation
into the utility of the COS in LMIC, or non-English speaking
countries, in particular is warranted given the skew towards
participants from western countries in the development of the
COS [ 30].
The COS-EPOCH represents the ﬁrst COS for early childhood
obesity interventions inclusive of a wide range of risk factors
and conducted across a wide range of settings. Our scoping
review identi ﬁed a large number of outcomes that are currently
being collected and reported in early childhood obesity
prevention interventions, supporting the need for a standar-
dised set of core outcomes in this area. Through the
development and use of the COS-EPOCH, it is hoped that more
standardised data collection and reporting can lead to more
efﬁcient intervention evaluation and knowledge synthesis to
inform future intervention development and research transla-
tion efforts [ 8]. A recent systematic review identi ﬁed barriers to
the uptake of COS by trialists, and found lack of awareness of
existence of the COS and lack of validated instrument measures
were key barriers [ 31]. Informed by these ﬁndings dissemina-
tion of the COS-EPOCH will aim to maximise awareness and use
of the COS. Dissemination approaches will include presenta-
tions at relevant conferences an d seminars, and an infographic
has been developed for dissemination to relevant stakeholders,
including government, academic, community and organisa-
tional stakeholders interested in early childhood obesity
prevention interventions. A p rogram of work is also underway
to identify outcome measurement instruments to recommend,
to facilitate the collection of core outcomes in the COS-EPOCH
following the COSMIN guidelines [ 32, 33].
CONCLUSIONS
The Core Outcome Set for Early intervention trials to Prevent
Obesity in Childhood (COS-EPOCH) followed a rigorous and
validated approach that identi ﬁed 22 outcomes across nine
Table 3. continued
Outcome Outcome domain Outcome de ﬁnition
ﬁxed home and yard features. For example, size of backyard,
presence of playground or play equipment.
Early childhood education and
care (ECEC) environment
Includes ﬁxed or non- ﬁxed environmental features of home or
centre-based care, preschool or kindergarten to address obesity-
related behaviours. Fixed features might include playgrounds,
kitchens. Non-ﬁxed features might include service organisation and
policy environment.
Child wellbeing Emotional or cognitive functioning Includes social-emotional wellbeing and emotional health of
the child.
Economic evaluation Economic Includes any form of economic evaluation, including cost-
effectiveness analysis, cost-utility analysis.
*The COS for infant feeding interventions [ 8] should be consulted for interventions in children aged ≤ 1 year of age.
V. Brown et al.
1872
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
outcome domains for collection and reporting in all early obesity
prevention intervention studies. Future research will identify
recommended outcome measurement instruments for each of
the outcomes included in the COS-EPOCH, to further facilitate and
consolidate outcome selection and reporting. Development and
uptake of the COS-EPOCH will assist in more streamlined
syntheses of ﬁndings across research studies, potentially making
better use of the learnings from early childhood obesity
prevention intervention studies. A more consistent approach to
measurement and reporting of this minimum set of outcomes that
is considered essential across stakeholder groups will lead to more
timely, robust and comprehensive evaluation of the effects of
early childhood obesity prevention interventions, and will better
support a comprehensive understanding of the effects of
interventions and the mechanisms for those effects.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organisation. Obesity and overweight Geneva: World Health
Organisation; 2021 Available from: https://www.who.int/health-topics/
obesity#tab=tab_1.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Childhood Overweight and Obesity
2021. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/childhood/.
3. Killedar A, Lung T, Petrou S, Teixeira-Pinto A, Tan EJ, Hayes A. Weight status and
health-related quality of life during childhood and adolescence: Effects of age
and socioeconomic position. Int J Obes. 2020;44:637 –45.
4. Nishtar S, Gluckman P, Armstrong T. Ending childhood obesity: A time for action.
Lancet. 2016;387:825 –7.
5. Brown T, Moore THM, Hooper L, Gao Y, Zayegh A, Ijaz S, et al. Interventions for
preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database Sys Rev. 2019. https://doi.org/
10.1002/14651858.CD001871.pub4.
6. Seidler AL, Hunter KE, Espinoza D, Mihrshahi S, Askie LM, Askie LM, et al.
Quantifying the advantages of conducting a prospective meta-analysis (PMA): a
case study of early childhood obesity prevention. Trials 2021;22:78.
7. Williamson PR, Altman DG, Bagley H, Barnes KL, Blazeby JM, Brookes ST, et al. The
COMET Handbook: version 1.0. Trials 2017;18:280.
8. Matvienko-Sikar K, Grif ﬁn C, Kelly C, Heary C, Lillholm Pico Pedersen M, McGrath
N, et al. A core outcome set for trials of infant-feeding interventions to prevent
childhood obesity. Int J Obes. 2020;44:2035 –43.
9. Matvienko-Sikar K, Grif ﬁn C, McGrath N, Toomey E, Byrne M, Kelly C, et al.
Developing a core outcome set for childhood obesity prevention: A systematic
review. Maternal Child Nutr. 2019;15:e12680.
10. World Health Organisation. Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood
Obesity. Geneva: WHO; 2016.
11. Brown V, Moodie M, Tran HNQ, Sultana M, Hunter KE, Byrne R, et al. Protocol for
the development of Core Outcome Sets for Early intervention trials to Prevent
Obesity in CHildren (COS-EPOCH). BMJ Open. 2021;11:e048104.
12. Kirkham JJ, Davis K, Altman DG, Blazeby JM, Clarke M, Tunis S, et al. Core Out-
come Set-STAndards for development: The COS-STAD recommendations. PLoS
Med. 2017;14:e1002447.
13. Kirkham JJ, Gorst S, Altman DG, Blazeby JM, Clarke M, Devane D, et al. Core
Outcome Set –STAndards for Reporting: The COS-STAR Statement. PLoS Med.
2016;13:e1002148.
14. Brown V, Moodie M, Sultana M, Hunter KE, Byrne R, Zarnowiecki D, et al. A
scoping review of outcomes commonly reported in obesity prevention inter-
ventions aiming to improve obesity-related health behaviors in children to age
5 years. Obes Rev. 2022;23:e13427.
15. Jünger S, Payne SA, Brine J, Radbruch L, Brearley SG. Guidance on Conducting
and REporting DElphi Studies (CREDES) in palliative care: Recommendations
based on a methodological systematic review. Palliat Med. 2017;31:684 –706.
16. Gargon E, Crew R, Burnside G, Williamson PR. Higher number of items associated
with signiﬁcantly lower response rates in COS Delphi surveys. J Clinical Epidemiol.
2019;108:110–20.
17. Diamond IR, Grant RC, Feldman BM, Pencharz PB, Ling SC, Moore AM, et al.
Deﬁning consensus: a systematic review recommends methodologic criteria for
reporting of Delphi studies. J Clinical Epidemiol. 2014;67:401 –9.
18. Trevelyan EG, Robinson PN. Delphi methodology in health research: how to do it?
Eur J Integrative Med. 2015;7:423 –8.
19. Williamson PR, Altman DG, Blazeby JM, Clarke M, Devane D, Gargon E, et al.
Developing core outcome sets for clinical trials: issues to consider. Trials
2012;13:132.
20. Taylor RM, Feltbower RG, Aslam N, Raine R, Whelan JS, Gibson F. Modi ﬁed
international e-Delphi survey to de ﬁne healthcare professional competencies for
working with teenagers and young adults with cancer. BMJ open. 2016;6:
e011361.
21. Hirsch M, Duffy JMN, Barker C, Hummelshoj L, Johnson NP, Mol B, et al. Protocol
for developing, disseminating and implementing a core outcome set for endo-
metriosis. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e013998.
22. De Meyer D, Kottner J, Beele H, Schmitt J, Lange T, Van Hecke A, et al. Delphi
procedure in core outcome set development: rating scale and consensus criteria
determined outcome selection. J Clinical Epidemiol. 2019;111:23 –31.
23. Bruce I, Harman N, Williamson P, Tierney S, Callery P, Mohiuddin S, et al. The
management of Otitis Media with Effusion in children with cleft palate (mOMEnt):
a feasibility study and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess.
2015;19:1–374.
24. Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials (COMET) Initiative. COMET
Initiative 2020 [Available from: http://www.comet-initiative.org.
25. Harvey N, Holmes CA. Nominal group technique: An effective method for
obtaining group consensus. Int J Nurs Prac. 2012;18:188 –
94.
26. Duffy JMN, AlAhwany H, Bhattacharya S, Collura B, Curtis C, Evers JLH, et al.
Developing a core outcome set for future infertility research: an international
consensus development study †‡. Human Reproduc. 2020;35:2725 –34.
27. Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials (COMET) Initiative. Plain lan-
guage resources [Available from: https://www.comet-init iative.org/Patients/
PlainLanguage .
28. Mentimeter AB (publ). Mentimeter Stockholm2022 [Available from: https://
www.mentimeter.com/.
29. Pereira MMCE, Padez CMP, Nogueira HGDSM. Describing studies on childhood
obesity determinants by Socio-Ecological Model level: a scoping review to
identify gaps and provide guidance for future research. Int J Obes.
2019;43:1883–90.
30. Karumbi J, Gorst SL, Gathara D, Gargon E, Young B, Williamson PR. Inclusion of
participants from low-income and middle-income countries in core outcome sets
development: a systematic review. BMJ Open. 2021;11:e049981.
31. Hughes KL, Clarke M, Williamson PR. A systematic review ﬁnds Core Outcome Set
uptake varies widely across different areas of health. J Clin Epidemiol.
2021;129:114–23.
32. Centre for Research Excellence in Translating Early Prevetion of Obesity in Childhood.
EPOCH-Translate 2022 [Available from:https://earlychildhoodobesity.com/.
33. Prinsen CAC, Vohra S, Rose MR, Boers M, Tugwell P, Clarke M, et al. Guideline for
selecting outcome measurement instruments for outcomes included in a Core
Outcome Set. The Netherlands: COMET and COSMIN; 2016.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
VB was supported by an Alfred Deakin Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in the
completion of this work. VB, KDH, KEH, RB, ALS, RKG, RWT, and MM were researchers
with the Centre for Research Excellence in the Early Prevention of Obesity in
Childhood (CRE EPOCH, GNTID1101675). VB, KDH, KEH, RKG, ALS, KMS, and RWT are
researchers with the Centre for Research Excellence in Translating the Early
Prevention of Obesity in Childhood (CRE EPOCH-Translate, GNT2006999). KMS
receives support from a Health Research Board Applying Research into Policy and
Practice Award (HRB-ARPP-A-2018-011). RT is supported by the Karitane Chair in Early
Childhood Obesity. ALS is supported by an NHMRC Investigator Grant GNT 2009432.
KDH is supported by a Heart Foundation Future Leader Fellowship (105929).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
VB conceived the study, with signi ﬁcant input from all authors. VB, MS, KDH, KEH, RB,
ALS, and KMS were involved in data acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data
and provided technical and administrative support. RKG, RT, KDH, KMS, and MM were
involved in data analysis and interpretation, and provided expert oversight of all
aspects of the project. VB drafted the manuscript. All authors critically revised the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
FUNDING
Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
V. Brown et al.
1873
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41366-022-01198-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Vicki Brown.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
V. Brown et al.
1874
International Journal of Obesity (2022) 46:1867 – 1874