REVIEW
p
ublished: 14 December 2015
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01849
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 D ecember 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Edited by:
A
drian Meule,
University of Salzburg, Austria
Reviewed by:
Simone Munsch,
University of Fribourg, Switzerland
Alison Tovar,
University of Rhode Island, USA
*Correspondence:
Netalie Shloim
netalieshalom1977@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Eating Behavior,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 29 July 2015
Accepted: 14 November 2015
Published: 14 December 2015
Citation:
Shloim N, Edelson LR, Martin N and
Hetherington MM (2015) Parenting
Styles, Feeding Styles, Feeding
Practices, and Weight Status in 4–12
Year-Old Children: A Systematic
Review of the Literature.
Front. Psychol. 6:1849.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01849
Parenting Styles, Feeding Styles,
Feeding Practices, and Weight Status
in 4–12 Year-Old Children: A
Systematic Review of the Literature
Netalie Shloim 1*, Lisa R. Edelson 2, Nathalie Martin 2 and Marion M. Hetherington 1
1 Biopsychology Group: Human Nutrition, School of Psychology, Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK, 2 Behavior and Perception, Nestlé Research Center, Lausanne, Switzerland
Childhood is a critical period in the development of obesity. Eating patterns established
early in life track into later life. Therefore, parental approaches to feeding in their general
parenting style, feeding styles, and speciﬁc feeding practices will have a profound impact
on how children eat and grow. A systematic research review following PRISMA guidelines
was conducted to identify, discuss and integrate recent research investigating the
relationship between parenting styles, feeding styles, feeding practices, and body mass
index (BMI) in children. Medline (Ovid), PsycINFO, Web of Science, and Food Science and
T echnology Abstracts were systematically searched using sensitive search strategies.
Studies were limited to papers published in English between 2010 and February 2015
with participants aged 4–12 years old with outcomes including obesity, change in weight,
or BMI. The search yielded 31 relevant quantitative peer-reviewed papers meeting all
inclusion criteria: seven longitudinal, 23 cross-sectional, one randomized control trial.
Associations between parenting style and child BMI were strongest and most consistent
within the longitudinal studies. Uninvolved, indulgent or highly protective parenting was
associated with higher child BMI, whereas authoritative parenting was associated with
a healthy BMI. Similarly for feeding styles, indulgent feeding was consistently associated
with risk of obesity within cross-sectional studies. Speciﬁc feeding practices such as
restriction and pressure to eat were linked to BMI, especially within cross-sectional
studies. Where child traits were measured, the feeding practice appeared to be
responsive to the child, therefore restriction was applied to children with a high BMI and
pressure to eat applied to children with a lower BMI. Behaviors and styles that are speciﬁc
to the feeding context are consistently associated with child BMI. However, since obesity
emerges over time, it is through longitudinal, carefully measured (through questionnaire
and observation) studies which take account of child appetite and temperament that the
association between parenting style, feeding style, speciﬁc feeding practices, and child
obesity will be understood.
Keywords: parenting styles, feeding styles, feeding practices, obesity, children
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
INTRODUCTION
Childhood obesity has become a major global health challeng e.
In developed nations, approximately 24% of children and
adolescents are overweight or obese and in developing countr ies,
rates have reached 13% (from 8% in 1980;
Ng et al., 2014). While
obesity rates may have leveled oﬀ or declined in some nations
(
Ogden et al., 2014), prevalence remains high. Obese children are
likely to become obese adults and are at higher risk of develo ping
a range of chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease (CVD),
type 2 diabetes and cancer ( Lloyd et al., 2012 ). Therefore, it
is important to understand the factors which inﬂuence obesit y
development in order to guide future research, interventions, and
policy.
Obesity is caused by the chronic mismatch between
energy intake and expenditure, with food intake in excess of
requirements increasing body mass index (BMI). This chronic
imbalance is inﬂuenced by gene-environment interactions
(
Hetherington and Cecil, 2010 ). Some of these factors, including
candidate genes, socio-economic status (SES), exercise, sedentary
behavior, and sleep are well established ( Hetherington and
Cecil, 2010; Craigie et al., 2011; Hart et al., 2011; Wang et a l.,
2011; Ho et al., 2012; Magee and Hale, 2012 ). The interaction
between parents and their children is crucial since this is
when intake and activity patterns are established. In turn,
these inﬂuence children’s growth patterns and risk of becomi ng
overweight. It is important to understand the interplay betwe en
parenting, the food environment, and child weight outcomes.
The current review examines the speciﬁc modiﬁable aspects of
parent-child interactions (parenting/feeding styles and fe eding
practices) and their associations with child BMI. Modiﬁable
aspects are of interest because this permits consideration offuture
interventions to prevent or treat obesity.
Parents are important agents through which food preferences
and intake patterns are set, via both direct and indirect inﬂuences,
from controlling the child’s intake to passively modeling a healthy
or unhealthy diet (
Birch and Fisher, 1998; Brown and Ogden,
2004; Cooke et al., 2004; Clark et al., 2007; Beydoun and Wang ,
2009; Larsen et al., 2015 ). In the present review, the focus is
parenting or feeding styles and speciﬁc feeding practices whic h
might inﬂuence child BMI.
Parenting style is a general behavioral construct which
sets the emotional context within which parents and children
interact. These have often been characterized as having at
least two dimensions: demandingness (how much control
parents exercise) and responsiveness (warmth and acceptance
in response to their children’s needs). Within this deﬁnitio n,
there are four types of parenting styles, varying along these
two dimensions: (1) authoritative parenting, associated with a
high level of demandingness and rules with high responsivene ss
to the child; (2) authoritarian parenting linked to high
demandingness but low responsiveness characterized by rules but
with less inﬂuence from the child’s needs; (3) indulgent parenting
combining low demandingness and high responsiveness with
few rules but high engagement with the child’s needs; and
(4) uninvolved parenting which is associated with both
low demandingness and low responsiveness. An authoritative
parenting style is generally associated with the most positive
child outcomes, such as higher school performance (
Maccoby
and Martin, 1983; Darling and Steinberg, 1993 ) and with a more
positive home food environment ( Johnson et al., 2012).
Feeding styles may be viewed as a sub-category of parenting
styles that are speciﬁc to mealtimes and therefore the same
dimensions of demandingness and responsiveness are applied in
the feeding context (
Hughes et al., 2005; Ventura and Birch, 2008;
Blissett, 2011). Thus, with an authoritative feeding style, parents
actively encourage their child to eat but achieve this throug h
supportive behaviors including rules explained in a sensitive w ay
whereas with an authoritarian feeding style, parents encourage
eating through parent-centric rules ( Figure 1).
Feeding practices refer to the speciﬁc goal-directed behaviors
used by parents to directly inﬂuence their children’s eating .
This might include attempts to increase or decrease intake
of certain foods. Common feeding practices include: modelin g
eating behaviors, restricting certain types of food, pressur ing
children to eat, rewarding positive behaviors with food, and
availability of food at home. A more comprehensive list of speciﬁc
feeding practices can be found in
Gevers et al. (2014).
Given the complexity of the family meal structure, parenting
style, feeding style, and feeding practices are deﬁned within broad
constructs to simplify research and to promote understanding .
The general ways in which parents interact with their childre n
(parenting style) and particularly during meals and snack tim es
(feeding style) may inﬂuence parents’ choice of feeding pract ices
or the outcomes of these practices ( Stang and Loth, 2011; Collins
et al., 2014; Larsen et al., 2015 ). The interaction between parents
and children at the family meal is bi-directional and inform ed
by a number of diﬀerent environmental factors (e.g., income
and culture), parental attributes (beliefs, attitudes, beha viors),
and child characteristics (temperament, eating traits and l earned
behaviors). These additional factors will be taken into acc ount in
the current review, where available.
The present systematic review was undertaken to identify,
discuss, and integrate recent research exploring the speciﬁc
parenting styles, feeding styles, and feeding practices whic h
increase or decrease the risk of childhood obesity in childr en
aged 4–12 years old. The search was limited to studies publish ed
in the last 5 years to provide an update since the reviews
on parenting/feeding styles published by
Vollmer and Mobley
(2013) and on feeding practices by Hurley et al. (2011) cover
only articles published up until 2012 and 2009, respectively.
Another goal of the current review was to identify the gaps in t he
existing literature so that recommendations for future res earch
and interventions can be made. The review structure was base d
on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses guidance (PRISMA,
Moher et al., 2009).
METHODS
A systematic search was conducted to identify relevant stud ies
investigating associations between parenting styles, feed ing
styles, feeding practices, and obesity/overweight in 4–12 y ear-
old children. The search was conducted using Medline (Ovid),
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
FIGURE 1 | Summary of the parental feeding styles adapted from typ ological approach to parenting developed by Hughes et al. (2005) .
PsycINFO, Web of Science, and Food Science and Technology
Abstracts. The search strategy (the comprehensive search strategy
is available from the authors upon request) addressed key
search terms for obesity, parenting styles, and feeding beha viors
(including styles and practices). More speciﬁcally, literatu re
searches were conducted using a combination of the following
key terms: parenting (style), feeding (style, practices, beh aviors),
and weight-related keywords: eating, diet, (over)weight, obesity,
BMI. Age-related terms such as child were not included in the
search phase to avoid missing studies that used unusual terms
(e.g., third graders) or that did not include age terms in the title of
the paper. Nevertheless, studies were limited by child age at alater
stage. The ﬁnal search was limited to papers published in Englis h
between 2010 and February 2015, a period of just over 5 years,
permitting recent and timely evidence to be included within t he
search. Studies were included in the review if the mean age of
the participants was between 4 and 12 years old and therefore
studies with participants with an overlapping age range but with
a mean age of <4 or >12 were excluded. For longitudinal or
intervention studies, the sample age at baseline was used. Thi s
age group provided a broad base to explore risk within a time of
childhood when there is more independence than during infancy
and pre-school but with a greater dependence on families for
most meal occasions than adolescents or young adults. Studie s of
children with co-morbidity such as eating disorders, diabet es or
other diseases were excluded. Studies in which the outcome w as
not child BMI or change in weight were excluded as well. Four
review papers (
Thompson, 2010; Hurley et al., 2011; Sleddens
et al., 2011; Vollmer and Mobley, 2013 ) were identiﬁed and are
addressed in the discussion of this paper. Titles and abstracts were
screened for relevance and content. If the abstract did not provide
suﬃcient data, the entire paper was read to determine whether i t
met the inclusion criteria. Publications which included mu ltiple
age groups or which addressed several independent measures
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
were fully read but only ﬁndings that met the inclusion crite ria
are addressed in this review. The included papers ( N = 31) were
then summarized in a table covering the main characteristic s of
each paper (Table 1).
Papers were coded and scored ( Table 1) for quality using an
adapted rating scale (Moore, 2012). The scale contained 11 items
such as: Is the study clear in what it seeks to do? (Is the purpose
of the study discussed; Are the hypotheses presented; Are the
outcomes to be measured clearly stated); Were the measures used
valid and reliable? Each item was scored on a Likert scale usi ng
values of 0 = no; 1 = partly, and 2 = yes. The process resulted in
each paper being given a total score to reﬂect quality.
The ﬁrst author scored all of the papers and remaining three
co-authors scored a random sample of 10 papers, resulting in 84%
of the papers being scored for quality by at least two researche rs.
For papers with disagreements of more than three points on
quality ratings, an additional independent researcher then scored
the papers until an agreement was reached by re-reading the
paper and extracting relevant data to support the scores. Scores
which were oﬀ by 1–2 points were averaged. Finally, an inter-
rater reliability coeﬃcient was calculated. The ﬁndings in dicated
a high level of agreement (single measures interclass corre lations
by use of a one way random eﬀects model, r = 0.85, p <
0.0001). Overall the papers included in this review exceeded
a reasonable quality threshold, and most used measured BMI
alongside validated measures of parenting/feeding style an d/or
feeding practices.
RESUL TS
The initial search identiﬁed 2662 papers. Two hundred and ﬁfty -
nine papers were removed due to duplication. Two thousand two
hundred and sixty-ﬁve papers were excluded upon review of title
and abstracts, mostly due to studies with participants outsid e the
speciﬁed age range. This was expected as the word “child” was
not used in our search to avoid missing research using alternative
terms such as pre-adolescents, pre-schoolers, etc. Full text papers
were reviewed for 135 studies of which 100 were excluded. The se
were excluded on the basis of the outcome measure, the age range
or the absence of relevant behaviors (see Figure 2). The process
resulted in 35 papers for inclusion in this review. Four papers
were reviews (
Thompson, 2010; Hurley et al., 2011; Sleddens
et al., 2011; Vollmer and Mobley, 2013 ) and were therefore
not addressed in the results section but only in the discussi on.
While most papers addressed the role of feeding practices, it
was diﬃcult at times to ascertain whether the authors had use d
the conventional deﬁnitions for each of the three domains of
interest. For example, it has been reported by
Blissett (2011)
that inconsistencies in the use of these deﬁnitions is proble matic,
with terms such as feeding style confused with feeding practi ce,
so there are times when terms are not clearly conceptualized
or they are used synonymously. Therefore, within this revie w
the authors’ use of the construct has been applied but where
deﬁnitions overlap or are used interchangeably, this is noted. Due
to the variety of measures used and potential lack of precision, the
eﬀect sizes are not reported in the current review.
Overall Study Characteristics
The papers identiﬁed by the review process produced a range
of sample sizes including relatively small ( n = 69,
Olvera and
Power, 2010 ) to large scale studies like that of Jansen et al.
(2012) with 4987 children. The age range covered 2–18 years
within the papers, but the focus of this review was 4–12 years
representing school age and the age most likely to be inﬂuenced
by parenting and the home environment. Studies focused on
mostly mothers and their interactions with their children w ith
only one study addressing the diﬀerences between maternal an d
paternal feeding practices (
Tschann et al., 2013 ). Most were
conducted in the USA ( n = 15), others were conducted in
Australia (4), the UK (4; one of which had a German comparison
group), the Netherlands (4), Malaysia (2), Brazil (1), and Tur key
(1). Studies were ethnically and economically diverse, but few
were suﬃciently powered to assess the speciﬁc contribution of
ethnic diﬀerences to the association between parenting and ch ild
BMI. All but one of the studies included both boys and girls; the
exception was
Rollins et al. (2014) with a girl-only sample. Only
one study addressed both parents’ and children’s perceptions o f
parenting styles ( Taylor et al., 2011 ). The main characteristics of
the papers revealed by the review process such as sample size,
country of origin, age range, design, measurements used, and
main ﬁndings are presented in Table 1.
Parenting Styles
Characteristics of the Studies
The search revealed six papers addressing parenting styles. Th ree
were longitudinal studies (
Olvera and Power, 2010; Rodenburg
et al., 2012; Hancock et al., 2014 ); and three were cross-sectional
(Hennessy et al., 2010; Rodenburg et al., 2011; Taylor et al., 2011).
Instruments Used
Of the six studies investigating parenting style, four diﬀere nt
instruments were used: the Parenting Dimensions Inventory was
used in two studies (
Hennessy et al., 2010; Olvera and Power,
2010), the Authoritative Parenting Index was used by one (Taylor
et al., 2011), a Dutch translation of a parenting style measure was
used by the same group in two papers ( Rodenburg et al., 2011,
2012), and the protective parenting measure was applied in one
study (Hancock et al., 2014).
Findings
In all three longitudinal studies identiﬁed since 2010, pare nting
style was signiﬁcantly associated with child weight.
Olvera and
Power (2010) investigated the change in weight from baseline
to follow-up (3 years later) in Mexican-American children
and their mothers. These authors found that when controllin g
for initial weight status, children whose mothers followed a n
indulgent or uninvolved parenting style at baseline were more
likely to become overweight than children of authoritarian or
authoritative mothers. In the study by
Rodenburg et al. (2012)
the potential interaction eﬀect between parenting style and
child appetite traits were examined from baseline to 1 year
follow-up. In this study, food approach traits such as food
responsiveness and enjoyment of food predicted a higher child
BMI z-score and all food avoidance traits predicted a lower chi ld
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 1 | Characteristics of the papers identiﬁed in the revi ew.
Parenting Styles Country Sample size;
mean (SD) or
age range of
children in
years
Study
design
Validated questionnaires Other
measures
Main ﬁndings Scores
Hancock et al., 2014 Australia 2596 parents and
children; 4–5
Longitudinal Protective parenting
measure
Child weight and
height;
demographics
Protectiveness at age 6–7
not associated with weight
at any age. No association
between maternal
protectiveness at age 8–9
and overweight/obesity at
age 4–5, 6–7 or 8–9 years.
Greater maternal
protectiveness at age 8–9
was associated with
children being overweight or
obese at ages 10–11
17
Olvera and Power, 2010 USA 69 mothers and
children; 6.7(1.3)
Longitudinal:
3 year
follow-up
PDI Child and parent
weight and
height;
demographics
Indulgent mothers were
more likely to have
overweight children in a 3
year follow up compared to
authoritative or authoritarian
mothers
18
Rodenburg et al., 2011 Netherlands 1665 parents and
children; 8–9
Cross-
sectional
Home Environment Survey
(HES); FFQ; Dutch Youth
Health Care questionnaire;
Parenting scales (
Steinberg
et al., 1989 ; Dutch
translation)
Child and parent
weight and
height;
demographics
Rejecting parenting style
was associated with
increased child BMI
20
Rodenburg et al., 2012 Netherlands 1275 parents and
children; 8.2(0.5)
Longitudinal CEBQ; FFQ; Parenting
scales (Steinberg et al.,
1989; Dutch translation)
Child’ s weight
and height.
Authoritative parenting was
positively associated with
fruit consumption of fussy
eaters. Neglecting parenting
showed a positive
association with child’ s
weight
20
FEEDING STYLES
Frankel et al., 2014 USA 296 parents and
children; 4.4(0.7)
Cross-
sectional
CFSQ; CEBQ Child and parent
weight and
height
Indulgent feeding style was
negatively associated with
satiety responsiveness and
positively associated with
enjoyment of food and BMI
18
Hennessy et al., 2010 USA 99 parents and
children; 9(1.5)
Cross-
sectional
PDI-S; CFSQ; CFQ Child’ s weight
and height;
demographics.
Feeding style, rather than
parenting style correlated
with child BMI. Indulgent
feeding style was
associated with a higher
child BMI z-score; feeding
style moderated the link
between restriction and
child BMI z-score
18
Hughes et al., 2011 USA 177 parents and
children; 4.4(0.7)
Cross-
sectional
with
repeated
behavioral
observations
CFSQ Child’ s weight
and height;
demographics;
Home
Observation
Coding System;
Feeding
Behavior Coding
Parents with indulgent
feeding styles made fewer
demands on their children
to eat during dinner and
showed lower levels of
negative affect and
intrusiveness. Hispanic boys
with indulgent parents had
19
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 1 | Continued
Parenting Styles Country Sample size;
mean (SD) or
age range of
children in
years
Study
design
Validated questionnaires Other
measures
Main ﬁndings Scores
System (FBCS) signiﬁcantly higher BMI z
scores compared to
Hispanic boys in the other
three feeding style groups.
No differences in any other
ethinic group
T ovar et al., 2012 USA 383 mothers and
children; 6.2(2.7)
Cross-
sectional
baseline data
from a RCT
CFSQ; Centre for
Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale (CES-D);
Perceived Stress Scale
(PSS)
Parent and child
weight and
height;
demographics
Feeding styles signiﬁcantly
differed by child BMI
z-score. Indulgent feeding
style was associated with a
higher child weight
16
Yilmaz et al., 2013 Turkey 380 parents and
children; 5–7
Cross-
sectional
PFSQ Child weight and
height;
demographics;
visual scale of
child body shape
Misperception of child
weight was common (42%).
Emotional feeding and
encouragement to eat were
lower in children perceived
to be overweight. Emotional
feeding and permissive
control were lower in
children correctly
categorized as overweight
11
FEEDING PRACTICES
Blissett and Bennett,
2013
UK and
Germany
171 families;
2–12
Cross-
sectional and
cross-
cultural
comparison
CFPQ; CEBQ; Dutch Eating
Behavior Questionnaire
(DEBQ)
Parent’ s and
child weight and
height;
demographics
Black Afro-Caribbean (BAC)
families in the UK followed a
more restrictive feeding
regime. White German
parents used the lowest
levels of pressure to eat.
Parental restriction was
positively associated with
child BMI in BAC families
only
17
Campbell et al., 2010 Australia 392 parents and
children; 5–6,
10–12
Longitudinal:
3 year
follow-up
CFQ (Restriction) Parent’ s and
child’ s weight
and height;
demographics
Higher baseline restriction
scores were associated with
lower BMI z-scores at 3
year follow up in the
younger (5–6 years) but not
older (10–12 years) children
16
Cardel et al., 2012 USA 267 children;
7–12
Cross
sectional
CFQ Child’ s weight
and height;
Pubertal status;
Genetic
admixture;
Socioeconomic
status
Parental restriction was a
signiﬁcant predictor of
child’ s BMI. Parental
pressure to eat was
negatively associated with
child BMI
21
Costa et al., 2011 Brazil 110 parents and
children; 6–10
Cross
sectional
CFQ; The Brazil Economic
Classiﬁcation Criterion
Child weight and
height
Boys were more likely to be
overweight or obese than
girls; high child BMI was
associated with higher
perceived weight, concern,
monitoring and restriction.
Pressure to eat was
inversely associated with
child BMI
14
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 1 | Continued
Parenting Styles Country Sample size;
mean (SD) or
age range of
children in
years
Study
design
Validated questionnaires Other
measures
Main ﬁndings Scores
Dev et al., 2013 USA 329 parents and
children; 2–5
Cross-
sectional
data from a
longitudinal
study
CFQ;Three Factor Eating
Questionnaire (TFEQ);
Eating Attitudes T est (EAT)
Child weight and
height; 22
previously
identiﬁed risk
factors for
obesity.
Restriction linked to greater
likelihood to have an
overweight/obese child
13
Gubbels et al., 2011 Netherlands 2021 mothers
and children; 5–7
Longitudinal CFQ; FFQ Parent and
child’ s weight
and height;
child’ s energy
balance-related
parenting
practices; child’ s
dietary intake,
activity behavior;
demographics
Restriction of unhealthy
food was positively
associated with child’ s BMI;
monitoring a child’ s diet was
positively associated with
children’ s diet quality
15
Holland et al., 2014 USA 170 parents and
children; 7–11
Cross-
sectional
comparison
from RCT
CFQ; Barratt Demographics
Questionnaire
Child’ s weight
and height; Child
dietary intake
Lower levels of restrictive
feeding were associated
with lower child BMI-Z
scores following intervention
17
Lee and Keller, 2012 Netherlands 4987 parents and
children; 4
Cross-
sectional
CEBQ; CFQ Parent and child
weight and
height
Parents’ Pressure to Eat
was negatively related to
child BMI
15
Jansen et al., 2012 USA 77 parents and
children; 4.1(0.9)
Cross-
sectional
CFQ Parent and child
weight and
height;
demographics
Child BMI was positively
associated with parental
concern about child weight
and with lower perceived
responsibility for feeding
21
Lee and Keller, 2012 USA 175 parents and
children; 4–6
Cross-
sectional
CFQ Child’ s weight
and height; test
meals served in
a lab
Pressure to eat was
negatively associated with
child BMI z score
15
Manan et al., 2012 Malaysia 175 mothers and
children; 7–8
Cross-
sectional
CFQ Child weight and
height;
demographics
Pressure to eat among
parents of overweight and
obese children was
signiﬁcantly lower compared
to healthy weight children.
Food restriction was
positively associated with
child’ s BMI
16
Marshall et al., 2011 Australia 93 parents and
children; 7.6(2.9)
Cross-
sectional
comparison
from
baseline
measures
from an RCT
General Nutrition
Knowledge Questionnaire;
CFQ; Family Food
Environment questionnaire
(FFEQ); CFPQ
Child and parent
weight and
height;
demographics;
24-hour recalls
for child’ s diet
Greater use of a combined
guide-and-reward construct
and higher levels of concern
for their child’ s intake were
signiﬁcantly associated with
lower child BMI-Z scores
15
Murashima et al., 2012 USA 330 mothers and
children; 4.2(0.6)
Cross-
sectional
Parental control over child
feeding; the Block Food
Screener (BFS);
Child and parent
weight and
height
Directive control predicted
lower child BMI; Mothers’
nondirective control was
20
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 1 | Continued
Parenting Styles Country Sample size;
mean (SD) or
age range of
children in
years
Study
design
Validated questionnaires Other
measures
Main ﬁndings Scores
associated with intake of
lower energy density and
higher nutrient dense foods
Noor et al., 2012 Malaysia 204 parents and
children; 9–12
Cross-
sectional
CFQ (Malay version) Child weight and
height
Higher restriction associated
with higher BMI; low SES
associated with low BMI
15
Rollins et al., 2014 USA 180 mothers and
daughters;
5.4(0.4)
Longitudinal CFQ; Restricted Access
Questionnaire (RAQ)
Child weight and
height
Limiting or restricting snacks
was associated with eating
in the absence of hunger
(EAH) at 5 years; Low
inhibitory control girls had
greater increases in EAH
and BMI from 5 to 7 years
17
T aylor et al., 2011 Australia 175 parents and
children; 9.2(1.1)
Cross-
sectional
Authoritative Parenting
Index (API); CFPQ; Parental
activity-related practices;
Child Nutrition
Questionnaire (CNQ:
preference for fruit and
vegetable subscales);
Children’ s Attraction to
Physical Activity
Questionnaire (CAPA)
Parent and child
weight and
height;
parent-reported
child diet and
physical activity;
child’ s
preference for
non-core foods;
parents’ level of
education.
General parenting style was
not associated with child
BMI. Parental food
restriction was associated
with higher BMI whereas
pressure to eat was
associated with lower BMI
20
T schann et al., 2013 USA Parents of 174
Mexican
American children
(quantitative);
n = 35 parents
(qualitative); 8–10
Cross-
sectional and
qualitative
Parental Feeding Practices
(PFP)
Parent and child
weight and
height;
Sociodemographic
information
Mothers and fathers differed
in their use of feeding
practices. Higher maternal
positive involvement in
feeding was associated with
lower child BMI. Parental
pressure to eat was
associated with lower child
BMI, parental restriction with
higher child BMI. Fathers
using food to control
behavior had children with
lower BMI
11
Webber et al., 2010a UK 213 mothers and
children; 7–9
Cross-
sectional
analysis of
baseline data
from
longitudinal
study
CEBQ; CFQ Child weight and
height; FMI; WC;
demographics
Maternal restriction was
associated with food
responsiveness. Pressure to
eat was associated with
satiety responsiveness,
slowness of eating, and
fussiness. All effects were
independent of child BMI
20
Webber et al., 2010b UK 213 parents and
children; 7–9
Cross-
sectional
analysis of
baseline data
from
longitudinal
study
CFQ Child weight and
height; FMI; WC;
demographics;
maternal
perception of
weight and
concern about
overweight
Higher BMI was associated
with lower ‘pressure to eat’
and higher ‘restriction’
scores. Maternal concern
about overweight mediated
the association between
child adiposity and
restriction
20
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 1 | Continued
Parenting Styles Country Sample size;
mean (SD) or
age range of
children in
years
Study
design
Validated questionnaires Other
measures
Main ﬁndings Scores
Webber et al., 2010c UK 213 parents and
children; 7–9
Longitudinal CFQ Child weight and
height; FMI; WC
No longitudinal association
between child feeding
practices at baseline and
change in child adiposity.
Higher child BMI at baseline
was associated with smaller
decrease in food monitoring
and larger decrease in
pressure to eat at follow-up
19
Wehrly et al., 2014 USA 243 parents and
children; 4–6
Cross-
sectional and
cross-
cultural
comparison
CFQ Child weight and
height;
demographics
Pressure to eat negatively
associated with BMI.
Restriction positively
correlated with perceived
weight
19
Zhang and McIntosh,
2011
USA 312 parents and
children; 11.9(2.2)
Cross-
sectional
Child weight and
height;
interviews about
parental control
over child
feeding
Parental encouragement to
eat enough was associated
with a lower child BMI and
helping children to eat a
healthy diet was associated
with a higher BMI
15
Abbreviations: BMI, Body Mass Index; CEBQ, Child Eating Behavior Question naire; CFQ, Child Feeding Questionnaire; CFSQ, Caregiver’s Fee ding Styles Questionnaire; CFPQ,
Comprehensive Feeding Practices Questionnaire; FFQ, Food Frequen cy Questionnaire; FMI, Fat Mass Index; PDI(-S), Parenting Dimensi on Inventory(-Short Form); PFSQ, Parental
Feeding Style Questionnaire; WC, Waist Circumference.
BMI. An uninvolved (“neglectful”) parenting style ampliﬁed the
relationship between food approach traits and a higher BMI
z-score. This illustrates the importance of considering chi ld
characteristics as well as parenting styles when assessing o besity
risk. Within the Australian longitudinal cohort where prote ctive
parenting was used to predict BMI over a period of 5 years (data
collected three times), high maternal protectiveness measu red at
4–5 years old was not signiﬁcantly associated with weight un til
children reached the ages of 10–11 years (
Hancock et al., 2014 ).
By this time, protectiveness was associated with a higher odd s
ratio of the child being overweight or obese. This suggests that the
eﬀects of some parenting styles may emerge later in childhood.
Among the three cross-sectional studies, parenting style wa s a
signiﬁcant predictor of child BMI in only one, large scale study of
9 year-old children (n = 1275; Rodenburg et al., 2011) and failed
to reach signiﬁcance in the other two smaller studies ( Hennessy
et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2011). Child BMI z-score was associated
with a more rejecting parenting style which is described as lo w
support, low behavioral control but high psychological contro l
(Rodenburg et al., 2011 ). The study by Hennessy et al. (2010) of
91 families with 9 year-old children reported a modest association
between parenting style and feeding style; but only feeding s tyle
was linked to child BMI z-score (see next section). Although t he
study by Taylor et al. (2011) of 7–11 year old children ( n = 175)
found no association between parent-reported parenting style s
and child BMI, child-perceived parenting style was signiﬁcant ly
associated with diet and activity. In this case, when childr en
perceived parents to be more demanding and responsive, which
could be considered a proxy for authoritative parenting, they
showed healthier weight-related attitudes such as liking f or fruit
and vegetables and appreciation of physical activity. The potential
for a moderating role of the child’s perception of parenting sty le
is worthy of further consideration.
Overall, only the longitudinal studies showed that parenting
style was consistently associated with child BMI; the cross-
sectional studies were more mixed in their ﬁndings, perhaps
attributable to smaller sample sizes. It can be concluded
from the stronger evidence extracted from longitudinal stu dies
that parenting style is associated with child BMI over time
and these eﬀects may be inﬂuenced by child age and eating
traits.
Feeding Styles
Characteristics of the Studies
In total, ﬁve papers investigated feeding style and its associ ation
with child BMI and they all used a cross-sectional design
(
Hennessy et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2011; Tovar et al., 2012 ;
Yilmaz et al., 2013; Frankel et al., 2014 ).
Instruments Used
Most studies (
Hennessy et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2011;
Tovar et al., 2012; Frankel et al., 2014 )measured feeding style
using the Caregiver Feeding Style Questionnaire (CFSQ; Hughes
et al., 2005 . One study ( Hughes et al., 2011 ) cross-validated
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
FIGURE 2 | Flow diagram study selection process for review. *T wo articles addressed parenting style and feeding particl es. **One article addressed feeding style
and parenting style.
its ﬁndings from the CFSQ with ﬁndings from observational
measurements made at three dinner meals, using the Feeding
Behavior Coding System (FBCS;
Hughes et al., 2007 ), an
observational checklist that documents speciﬁc feeding prac tices
and their frequency of occurrence. This study had a high quali ty
rating as it allowed comparison of parents’ self-reported data
with observed behaviors.
Yilmaz et al. (2013) used the Parental
Feeding Style Questionnaire (Wardle et al., 2002) which measures
instrumental feeding, emotional feeding, encouragement t o eat
and control over eating. In addition, the validated Turkish
version of the PFSQ divided the control scale into two subsca les:
strict control (parent decides when/what/how much child
should eat) and permissive control (allowing child to make
these decisions).
Findings
In three of the ﬁve cross-sectional studies, indulgent feedi ng
styles were associated with higher weight or BMI z-scores
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
(Hennessy et al., 2010; Tovar et al., 2012; Frankel et al., 201 4).
Where both parenting styles and feeding styles were evaluate d in
the same families it was found that the indulgent feeding style
was associated with child BMI, but not parenting style (Hennessy
et al., 2010).
Mothers of Turkish 5–7 year-olds who perceived their
child to be overweight reported less use of emotional feeding
styles or encouragement to eat on the Parental Feeding Style
Questionnaire (PFSQ;
Wardle et al., 2002; Özçetin et al., 2010;
Yilmaz et al., 2013 ). This suggests that parental perception
of child’s weight may inﬂuence their use of feeding styles or
practices.
Within a sample of African American and Hispanic American
families, an indulgent feeding style was associated with lo wer
satiety responsiveness, higher enjoyment of food, and a high er
BMI in the children (
Frankel et al., 2014 ). The study by Hughes
et al. (2011) found that Hispanic boys with indulgent parents had
signiﬁcantly higher BMI z-scores compared to Hispanic boys in
the other three feeding style groups (authoritative, author itarian,
and uninvolved), but this association was not seen in Hispani c
girls or in African American children. The importance of
gender and ethnic diﬀerences in determining the relationshi p
between feeding style and child BMI are evident.
Tovar et al.
(2012) studied feeding styles among recent immigrants to the
USA. They found that among Haitian, Brazilian, and Latina
women, authoritarian and indulgent feeding styles were the most
common. Similar to ﬁndings from studies in non-immigrant
populations, the indulgent feeding style was positively assoc iated
with a high child BMI z-score across this diverse sample.
Overall, these ﬁndings illustrate the more consistent
relationship between feeding style and risk of obesity compa red
to more general measures of parenting style.
Feeding Practices
Characteristics of the Studies
Most of the papers identiﬁed in this review investigated feedin g
practices. Seventeen studies were cross-sectional (
Hennessy et al.,
2010; Webber et al., 2010a,b; Costa et al., 2011; Marshall et al.,
2011; Taylor et al., 2011; Zhang and McIntosh, 2011; Cardel et al.,
2012; Jansen et al., 2012; Lee and Keller, 2012; Murashima et a l.,
2012; Manan et al., 2012; Noor et al., 2012; Blissett and Benn ett,
2013; Dev et al., 2013; Tschann et al., 2013; Wehrly et al., 201 4);
four were longitudinal ( Campbell et al., 2010; Webber et al.,
2010c; Gubbels et al., 2011; Rollins et al., 2014 ); and one was a
randomized control trial (Karp et al., 2014).
Instruments Used
The Child Feeding Questionnaire (CFQ) developed by
Birch
et al. (2001) was the most commonly used measure to assess
feeding practices and was used in 18 of the 22 empirical studies
(
Campbell et al., 2010; Hennessy et al., 2010; Webber et al.,
2010a,b,c; Costa et al., 2011; Gubbels et al., 2011; Marshal l et al.,
2011; Cardel et al., 2012; Jansen et al., 2012; Lee and Keller, 2012;
Manan et al., 2012; Noor et al., 2012; Dev et al., 2013; Hollan d
et al., 2014; Karp et al., 2014; Rollins et al., 2014; Wehrly et a l.,
2014).
In one study ( Marshall et al., 2011 ) the CFQ was used as
part of a larger parenting questionnaire which also included
the Comprehensive Feeding Practices Questionnaires (CFPQ;
Musher-Eizenman and Holub, 2007 ) and the Family Food
Environment questionnaire (Campbell et al., 2006 ). Both studies
by Blissett and Bennett (2013) and Taylor et al. (2011) used the
CFPQ whereas Tschann et al. (2013) used the Parental Feeding
Practices questionnaire, which was adapted from items taken
from several validated parental feeding practice measures such as
the CFPQ and CFQ. In each case, the measures included scores
for monitoring, restriction and pressuring to eat.
Murashima et al. (2012) used a questionnaire they had
developed (Parental Control over Child Feeding; Murashima
et al., 2011 ) assessing diﬀerent types of control applied to child
feeding situations. The study by Zhang and McIntosh (2011)
assessed feeding practices such as encouraging adequate int ake,
keeping track of types of foods eaten and building healthy
habits using telephone-based interviews. One study also asked
children to report on the extent to which their mother control led
access to snack foods (
Rollins et al., 2014 ). Hughes et al.
(2011) complemented self-report measures from the CFSQ by
observational measures as mentioned above.
Restriction/Control Feeding
Of the original research studies, 14 observed a signiﬁcant
association between restrictive/controlling feeding and high child
BMI, although this was more strongly evidenced within the
cross-sectional studies (see Table 2). Within these studies, one
study found the association was speciﬁc to girls with low
inhibitory control (
Rollins et al., 2014 ) and one study had mixed
ﬁndings showing positive associations in some subgroups base d
on ethnicity ( Blissett and Bennett, 2013 ). One study showed a
negative association between restriction and BMI in younger, but
not older, children (Campbell et al., 2010 ). Four studies reported
no associations with weight (see Table 2).
The four longitudinal studies were equivocal about whether
restriction and controlling feeding practices were associa ted with
obesity risk. Two studies found no longitudinal associatio ns
between restriction and change in BMI ( Webber et al., 2010c;
Gubbels et al., 2011 ). In the study by Campbell et al. (2010)
baseline restrictive feeding was not associated with basel ine BMI
in younger (5–6 years) or older (10–12 years) children. Howev er,
when the younger children were measured at the 3 year follow-
up, parents who were more restrictive at baseline had children
who gained less weight over time. It was suggested that restriction
can have protective eﬀects against unhealthy weight gain in
younger, but not older, children (
Campbell et al., 2010 ). This
supports the idea that some feeding practices such as setting
limits in early life may reduce obesity risk but this practice h as
less of an eﬀect on older children.
Taking child appetite characteristics into account, the
longitudinal study by
Rollins et al. (2014) examined controlling
feeding practices including restricting access to snacks an d
change in weight over 3 years. In this study four feeding
proﬁles were identiﬁed according to the type of limit-setting o r
restriction reported by mothers: (1) unlimited access to sna cks;
(2) sets limits and does not restrict snacks; (3) sets limits and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
TABLE 2 | The associations between parenting styles, feeding styles and feeding practices with child’s weight status.
Year and author Parenting style (P)/Feeding style (F) Feeding practices
Indulgent Authoritative Authoritarian Uninvolved Other R estriction Pressure Monitoring Other
Campbell et al., 2010 − ˆ
Hennessy et al., 2010 P0 P0 P0 P0 − − 0
Olvera and Power, 2010 P+ P− P− P0
Webber et al., 2010a 0 0 0
Webber et al., 2010b 0 0
Webber et al., 2010c 0 0
Costa et al., 2011 + 0 0
Gubbels et al., 2011 + − −
Hughes et al., 2011 F+# F0 F0 F0
Marshall et al., 2011 0 a
Rodenburg et al., 2011 P− P+
T aylor et al., 2011 b + − 0
Zhang and McIntosh, 2011 0 0
Cardel et al., 2012 + −
Jansen et al., 2012 + − 0
Lee and Keller, 2012 −
Manan et al., 2012 + − 0
Murashima et al., 2012 +
Noor et al., 2012 + − 0
Rodenburg et al., 2012 P0 P0 P0 P0
T ovar et al., 2012 F+
Blissett and Bennett, 2013 + 0 0
Dev et al., 2013 + 0 0
T schann et al., 2013 + − −
Yilmaz et al., 2013 c
Frankel et al., 2014 F+ F+
Hancock et al., 2014 d
Holland et al., 2014 + − −
Karp et al., 2014 + − 0
Rollins et al., 2014 +%
Wehrly et al., 2014 + −
0, No association/differences found.
+, positive association with child BMI.
−, inverse association with child BMI; grayed out cell indicates tha t association was not tested.
ˆHigher baseline restriction scores were associated with lower BMI z-scores at 3 year follow up in 5–6 year-old, but not in 10–12 year-old, childr en.
#Positive association only in Hispanic boys, but not other groups.
%In children with low inhibitory control.
aRewarding feeding styles was associated with lower BMI.
bResponsive and demanding parenting style dimensions were not associa ted with child BMI.
cEmotional feeding and encouragement to eat were lower in children perceived to be overweight.
dGreater maternal protectiveness at age 8–9 (but not at 6–7) was associ ated with children being overweight or obese at ages 10–11.
restricts high fat/sugar snacks; (4) sets limits and restri cts all
snacks. The girls whose mothers restricted all snacks showe d
higher levels of eating in the absence of hunger (EAH) at 5
years. The girls with low inhibitory control and high levels
of approach (strong temperamental anticipation of expected
reward) were heavier than those with high control and low
approach. In addition, girls with low inhibitory control whos e
mothers provided unlimited access to snacks or restricted al l
snacks gained the most weight and increased EAH between 5 and
7 years. This study is important in illustrating that charact eristics
of the child are essential in understanding the links betwee n
child BMI and feeding practices; also the study demonstrates the
nuanced relationship between restriction and child BMI. On t he
one hand, restricting all snacks was associated with EAH, an d
typically this behavior increases the risk of later obesity. On the
other hand, both extremes of limit setting (restricts all sn acks or
free access to snacks) did not produce the desired moderating
eﬀect on BMI in girls with low inhibitory control.
Of the cross-sectional studies, 12 found that restrictive feeding
was linked to child overweight and obesity (see Table 2). Thus,
the higher the child BMI, the greater the reported level of
restrictive feeding practice. Higher levels of restrictive feeding
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
have also been associated with maternal perceptions that the child
has a large appetite ( Webber et al., 2010a ) or concerns about
child overweight ( Webber et al., 2010b ), which may mediate the
association between child adiposity and restriction (Webber et al.,
2010b). This suggests that parents may use restriction in response
to the child’s perceived weight status or appetite.
Maternal concern about child overweight was also associate d
with a linear increase in restriction across weight groups, a nd
this maternal concern about overweight mediated the association
between child adiposity and restriction ( Webber et al., 2010b ),
suggesting that parents use restriction in response to child’ s
perceived weight status. In another study with a large cohort of
children, Jansen et al. (2012) reported signiﬁcant cross-sectional
associations between restrictive feeding and child weight . Noor
et al. (2012) , in a study of Malay children, also found that
parents of overweight children controlled their child’s int ake by
restricting amount of food given. This suggests that restri ction is
applied to heavier children across diﬀerent contexts and cultures.
Where diﬀerent groups have been studied within a single
study, it is also interesting to note that restrictive practi ces may
diﬀer by sub-group. For example, Cardel et al. (2012) reported
signiﬁcantly higher levels of restrictive feeding in Hispan ic
American parents compared to European American or African
American parents. In another study, higher restrictive feed ing
practices were associated with higher child weight, only for
British Black Afro Caribbean (BAC) but not for white British
(WB) or German (WG) families (
Blissett and Bennett, 2013 ).
In this instance, restrictive feeding practices were also li nked
with child eating traits. BAC parents reported that their chil dren
showed the highest food approach behaviors; in turn, higher food
approach was associated with higher child BMI in both BAC and
WG groups. Parents may therefore apply restriction as a means to
control eating behavior in their children with high food approach
tendencies.
Wehrly et al. (2014) examined two distinct dimensions of
control in an ethnically and economically diverse group of
American children: restriction of unhealthy foods and press ure
to eat healthy foods. They found these feeding practices were
positively correlated with each other and each was independently
associated with child BMI and body fatness. Although it seems
surprising that restriction and pressure are positively corre lated
when typically they are inversely correlated, this can be explained
by pressure or encouragement to consume healthy foods while
limiting or restricting access to unhealthy foods in childr en who
are overweight. Thus, the correspondence between the two relates
to diﬀerent ways to obtain the same outcome, namely healthy
eating. In addition, they found that parental perception of chi ld
overweight was linked to the use of restriction. These ﬁndin gs
conﬁrm those by
Webber et al. (2010b) that parental perception
of child weight status is an important determinant of feeding
practices.
Feeding practices such as restriction are subject to parental
perception of their child’s weight and are modiﬁable. This was
demonstrated in the trial by
Holland et al. (2014) who conducted
a 16-session family-based behavioral weight loss treatmen t with
families of 7–11 year old children. Across the time of the
trial, restrictive feeding practices decreased at the same t ime as
weight loss. During the period of the intervention, as childr en
lost weight, and reduced their total energy intake, parents
reported a decrease in their concern about their child’s weig ht
and an increase in perceived responsibility for quantity and
quality of the child’s diet. Children decreased the percentag e
of total energy intake from fat and increased energy from
protein. They reduced intake of sugars and increased intake o f
fruits and vegetables. Mediational analyses found a signiﬁc ant
mediating eﬀect of selective dietary changes between the cha nge
in restrictive feeding and change in child BMI. This suggests that
selective restriction (high fat foods, total energy intake ) helped
to promote a healthier BMI in this study. The trial had no
control group, therefore caution must be applied to the results
of this study. But the suggestion is made that limit setting, rather
than excessive restriction, was eﬀective in weight loss for t hese
children.
Across the four longitudinal studies, restrictive feeding
practices were not consistently related to weight change ove r
time. One found weight gain was more related to child inhibit ory
control than restriction (
Rollins et al., 2014 ) and one showed
a protective eﬀect of restriction applied to younger children.
Within cross-sectional studies, a consistent ﬁnding across studies
and cultures was that restriction was associated with a high child
BMI, suggesting the possibility of reverse causality. In othe r
words, the restrictions imposed by parents could be a response to
child eating traits and weight status, rather than a causal f actor
in developing overweight, although this was not found in the
one study that explored this possible relationship longitudi nally
(
Webber et al., 2010c).
Pressure to Eat
Pressure to eat is a practice parents may use to encourage or cajole
their child to eat enough food. Pressure to eat was associate d
with lower child BMI in 11 cross-sectional studies (
Hennessy
et al., 2010; Webber et al., 2010b; Costa et al., 2011; Taylor e t al.,
2011; Cardel et al., 2012; Jansen et al., 2012; Lee and Keller, 2012;
Manan et al., 2012; Noor et al., 2012; Tschann et al., 2013; Wehrly
et al., 2014 ), one longitudinal ( Gubbels et al., 2011 ), and one
part of a RCT ( Karp et al., 2014 ). No association was found in
another of the longitudinal studies ( Webber et al., 2010c ). In
the longitudinal study which did ﬁnd an eﬀect ( Gubbels et al.,
2011) the authors adapted the pressure to eat scale to speciﬁcally
investigate “stimulation of healthy intake” and found that this
variable was signiﬁcantly concurrently associated with hi gher
child BMI z-score at age 5 and predicted a healthy BMI at age
7. Therefore, parents encouraged heavier children to accept more
healthy foods in their diets at age 5 and this improved BMI by age
7 (
Gubbels et al., 2011).
Although there were studies ﬁnding no associations between
parental pressure to eat and child weight ( Blissett and Bennett,
2013; Holland et al., 2014 ), ﬁndings from the remaining seven
studies generally suggested that pressure to eat was associat ed
with a low child BMI. This pattern was also seen in non-Western
cultures with two studies of children in Malaysia ﬁnding tha t
parents of heavier children were less likely to pressure their c hild
to eat than parents of children with a normal (
Manan et al., 2012)
or low BMI (Noor et al., 2012).
In another study involving an ethnically and economically
diverse sample, pressure to eat diﬀered by parental ethnicity and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
by family income ( Wehrly et al., 2014 ). As such, White Non-
Hispanic parents reported lower pressure to eat compared to
White Hispanic, Black, and Asian parents. In addition, household
monthly income was inversely related to pressure to eat, paren ts’
perceptions of child weight status, and child BMI. Similarly, while
Blissett and Bennett (2013) reported ethnic diﬀerences in feeding
practices, such that White German parents reported lower level s
of pressure to eat compared to White British and Black Afro-
Caribbean mothers, this was not linked to weight. Pressure t o eat
might also vary by parental gender, with one study (
Tschann et al.,
2013) ﬁnding that fathers reported higher levels of pressure to eat
compared to mothers.
Webber et al. (2010a) reported that characteristics of the
child’s appetite were associated cross-sectionally with feed ing
practices applied by parents. Thus, children who were described
as fussy or as slow eaters had parents who reported higher level s
of pressure to eat, and those with high enjoyment of eating
had lower pressure to eat. But these eﬀects were independent of
child BMI. Exploring the possibility that parents reacted to chi ld
characteristics longitudinally, it was found that higher b aseline
BMI predicted a greater decrease in pressure to eat over time
(
Webber et al., 2010c).
Monitoring Child Intake
Among 17 papers investigating the associations between
monitoring and weight, most studies ( n = 14) found no link
between monitoring intake and child BMI (see Table 2). In fact,
some forms of monitoring child intake may protect against
obesity.
Of two longitudinal studies, one found no relationship
between monitoring and child weight (
Webber et al., 2010c), but
the other found that parental monitoring of child intake at 5 years
of age was associated with lower weight and better diet qualit y at
age 7 (Gubbels et al., 2011).
One study examined a wide variety of feeding practices as
part of a larger RCT to identify the role of learning and co-
participation in eating decisions on child BMI (
Marshall et al.,
2011). The authors explored diﬀerent factors emerging from an
exploratory factor analysis and included a factor on trackin g and
talking about food which includes monitoring intake of high fat
foods, sweet, and savory snacks, discussing the importance o f
health, the nutritional value of foods, and encouraging int ake
of healthy foods before unhealthy foods. Another factor, na med
“guide and reward” included parental eﬀorts to regulate their
child’s intake such as guiding intake away from favorite or “ junk”
foods; ensuring that their child does not eat too many sweets and
oﬀering favored foods as rewards for good behavior. This fact or
with a monitoring item was signiﬁcantly associated with hig h
child BMI, but because this factor included so many variables it is
diﬃcult to draw speciﬁc conclusions about monitoring. Conce rn
about poor intake was inversely related to child BMI.
Ethnic diﬀerences in parental feeding practices were found by
Blissett and Bennett (2013) . In this study Black Afro Caribbean
parents reported the lowest levels of monitoring (and highest
restriction) compared to White British and German parents.
Exploring potential bi-directional relationships, a longitudinal
study reported that a high baseline child BMI was associated
with a lower decrease in the use of monitoring over time
(
Webber et al., 2010c ). This maintenance of monitoring levels
in response to a high child BMI could be related to the child’s
tendency to overeat (
Webber et al., 2010a ). It has been argued
that monitoring might be protective against overweight (Gubbels
et al., 2011 ), and that this response by parents can be beneﬁcial.
If parents are concerned about child overweight and overeati ng,
then monitoring is an obvious surveillance strategy.
Positive Involvement
The concept of “positive involvement” encompasses several
“protective elements, ” deﬁned by
Tschann et al. (2013) as
parents limiting foods high in energy content, providing smal l,
appropriate servings of food, and asking children about what
they ate. This construct incorporates restriction of speciﬁc foods,
limiting portion size and monitoring intake. Parental positiv e
involvement was signiﬁcantly correlated with pressure to ea t
and restriction of amount of food. Maternal (but not paternal )
positive involvement was associated with a lower child BMI
(
Tschann et al., 2013). These results conﬁrm that some aspects of
restriction and monitoring may be considered protective agai nst
overweight and supports the proposal that structure and support
may beneﬁt children; however, it is not known which of the
elements within positive involvement are responsible for the
protective eﬀects.
DISCUSSION
The primary objective of the current review was to identify
modiﬁable parental behaviors associated with overweight an d
obesity in children aged 4–12 years. Overall in this age grou p, the
evidence suggests that the indulgent and uninvolved parentin g
and feeding styles were associated with a higher child BMI.
Associations between parenting style and child BMI were
strongest and most consistent within the longitudinal stud ies;
whereas for speciﬁc feeding practices such as restriction and
pressure to eat, these were linked to BMI most strongly within
cross-sectional studies. Measures of feeding style were mor e
consistently related to the risk of obesity than were more gen eral
measures of parenting style. Few studies identiﬁed protectiv e
feeding practices, but in one case, monitoring was linked wit h
lower BMI in a longitudinal context (
Gubbels et al., 2011 )
and positive involvement in one cross-sectional study ( Tschann
et al., 2013 ). In addition, studies highlighted the importance of
child characteristics such as inhibitory control or eating traits,
ethnicity, age, and socioeconomic status as moderating fac tors in
the relationship with child BMI.
Parenting Styles
Indulgent or uninvolved parenting was generally linked to higher
child BMI (e.g.,
Hughes et al., 2008; Olvera and Power, 2010 ).
These ﬁndings are consistent with previous literature as the se
groups were evaluated in comparison to the authoritative style .
In support, Sleddens et al.’s (2011) review of the literature notes
that authoritative parenting produced healthier children (healthy
eating, active lifestyles, and lower child BMI); whilst indulge nt
feeding was associated with more negative health outcomes. This
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
was also consistent with the review by Vollmer and Mobley
(2013), who also found the authoritative style to be protective
against obesity. It should be noted that the literature in fa vor of
the authoritative parenting style has been so consistent, ac ross
a number of child outcomes, that many of the recent papers on
parenting/feeding style used this style as the “reference” g roup.
Whereas, an authoritative parenting style combines expectat ions
about adherence to a healthy diet and sets limits on certain
foods, an indulgent style sets few expectations and gives chi ldren
greater freedom to choose what is eaten. Previous research h as
also linked authoritative parenting to healthy diets (e.g.,
Kremers
et al., 2003; De Bourdeaudhuij et al., 2008 ). A recent review by
Collins et al. (2014) explored the relationship between parenting
styles and its associations with feeding practices. Although in this
review, child weight was not a primary outcome, the authors
suggested that an authoritative parenting style was associa ted
with parental monitoring of child food intake (which has been
previously associated with healthy eating, and thus lower ch ild
BMI).
Given the importance of these observations for promoting
authoritative parenting, there is a clear need to use consist ent
measures of parenting styles across studies. In the present review,
four diﬀerent measurement tools were identiﬁed across the
six studies to investigate parenting style and a wide range of
deﬁnitions was applied. Consensus in deﬁnition, concepts and
measurements will lead to greater consensus in study outcom es,
as suggested by
Blissett (2011).
Feeding Styles
Mixed ﬁndings were identiﬁed for feeding styles. Authoritat ive
feeding styles were protective against the risk of obesity an d were
associated with a higher consumption of fruit and vegetables
(
Rodenburg et al., 2012 ) but not weight. Authoritative feeding
styles with clear rules and boundaries promoted a healthy BMI
(
Rodenburg et al., 2012 ). However, only cross-sectional studies
were found in this search, and this limits the conclusions wh ich
can be drawn about feeding styles over time. Similar to parent ing
styles, indulgent feeding styles were also associated with risk
of overweight and obesity, a ﬁnding which was consistent wit h
previous reviews ( Hurley et al., 2011; Vollmer and Mobley,
2013).
Evidence of ethnic diﬀerences and their associations with
diﬀerent feeding styles was reported. As such, Tovar et al. (2012)
noted that feeding styles signiﬁcantly diﬀered by child BMI z-
score and by ethnic group. The association between feeding
style and child weight was also found to vary between childre n
of diﬀerent genders or ethnicity (e.g.,
Hughes et al., 2011 ).
Therefore, many family factors such as culture, ethnic grou p,
gender, or SES might moderate the eﬀect of feeding styles on child
weight.
Feeding Practices
Speciﬁc feeding practices were linked to child BMI across a
number of studies, supporting existing observations of these
relationships (e.g.,
Faith et al., 2004 ). Among the studies in
the current review, restrictive/controlling feeding pract ices were
generally linked to higher child BMI, whereas pressure to eat
was associated with lower child BMI. Interestingly, restric tion
and pressure to eat were positively correlated with one another
when restriction was speciﬁcally applied to unhealthy foods
and pressure to eat on healthy foods (
Wehrly et al., 2014 ).
In this case, both behaviors were directed at children with a
high BMI, and may have been two practices used to guide
children toward the goal of healthier eating. Whether this i s
eﬀective is not yet evident. What is clear is that within each of
these constructs, the distinction must be made between nega tive
and positive consequences. Excessive restriction or strict limit
setting can be linked to parental eﬀorts to prevent overeating
compared with more positive and eﬀective limits placed on
intake (such as appropriate portion sizes) which serve to guide
healthy food intake. Similarly, pressuring children to eat w hen
they are not hungry (potentially reducing the child’s abilit y to
self-regulate intake) should be considered distinct from posit ive
encouragement to eat certain healthy foods as part of guiding
choice and providing appropriate “structure” (
Grolnick and
Pomerantz, 2009).
Hurley et al. (2011) reviewed the literature regarding
two practices related to responsive feeding ﬁnding positive
associations between nonresponsive feeding and child weigh t
in 24/31 papers. The integrative review by
Thompson (2010)
identiﬁed 18 papers addressing feeding practices and childhoo d
obesity in pre-school children. In this review, it was found t hat
culture, parental education and parents’ own eating behavior s
were all signiﬁcantly associated with child weight. In parti cular,
risk of obesity was associated with how parents controlled
and modiﬁed their children’s eating, conﬁrming the relationship
between pressure to eat and low child BMI and between
restriction and high child BMI.
Cross-sectional studies provide a snapshot but fail to take
account of how parents respond to their children over time
and how this evolves as children grow. The cause and eﬀect
direction is not known. It is feasible that restriction is appli ed
to children with high food approach tendencies (e.g.,
Webber
et al., 2010b). Similarly, parents may pressure children to eat who
are fussy or who seem to be undereating ( Webber et al., 2010b ).
Encouragement to eat a healthy diet and monitoring intake
to ensure children are eating well could be protective against
obesity, and may be applied more generally by parents, regardless
of the child’s weight status. This was illustrated by
Gubbels
et al. (2011) where monitoring children’s intake and stimulating
healthy food choices at age 5 years predicted a healthier child BMI
at age 7 years.
A few large-scale longitudinal studies have explored the
reciprocal relationship between feeding practices and weight. The
analyses by Webber et al. (2010c) , revealed evidence of a child
responsive model of parenting. Pressure to eat was applied in
response to children who had a lower BMI and monitoring was
maintained at a higher level for children with higher BMI. The
argument for a child responsive model in determining feeding
practices is persuasive. It may explain the consistent ﬁnding
of associations between child weight status and parents’ use
of speciﬁc feeding practices. Parents may respond diﬀerently
to individual children within their own family, taking chil d
characteristics, and eating behaviors into account.
Jansen et al.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
(2014) further explored the directionality of the relationship
between feeding practices (using the CFQ at age 4 years)
and child BMI longitudinally (ages 2, 4, and 6 years). They
demonstrated that child BMI at 2 years of age predicted parents’
use of restriction and pressure to eat (but not monitoring) at age
4. Such behaviors also predicted changes in BMI at 6 years old.
Although the associations were reciprocal, a stronger assoc iation
was observed for parental response to the child’s weight.
Gerards and Kremers (2015) identiﬁed a link between parental
behavior (parenting styles and food parenting practices) and
children’s weight-related outcomes. They suggest that gen eral
parenting style may moderate the impact of feeding practices on
children’s nutrition behaviors. Feeding practices should t herefore
be considered in the context of both what the child eats (cont ent
of the meal), the atmosphere provided by parents, and the eating
traits expressed by children. Early work on this topic is beginning
to emerge, with studies exploring how caregivers both react t o
and inﬂuence children’s behavior (
Tovar et al., 2015).
It is also important to account for moderators such as child
age, parent gender, family income, ethnic group, and family
eating behaviors (e.g., parental involvement in child’s eat ing, e.g.,
Tschann et al., 2013), when addressing feeding practices. Gender
of the parent might moderate the eﬀect of feeding practices on
child’s weight and ethnic groups may reveal diﬀerences in feeding
practices (
Blissett and Bennett, 2013 ). There are several possible
reasons for these reported diﬀerences. It is possible that the
higher frequency of use of behaviors, larger variation in re ported
behavior, or simply sample size diﬀerences between groups might
result in diﬀerent statistical outcomes. On the other hand, i t is
also possible that parents from diﬀerent cultural backgrounds
may use similar parenting practices to achieve diﬀerent goals:
some parents may use restriction for weight control or health ,
whereas others may aim to limit the amount of food consumed
so that foods will last longer when budgets are constrained. These
diﬀerences could therefore reﬂect diﬀerences in aﬄuence rath er
than culture (
Tovar et al., 2013 ). Future cross-cultural research
could explore these motivational factors in greater detail.
In summary, speciﬁc feeding practices are linked to the risk of
overweight and obesity. In particular, restricting food int ake has
been associated with higher child BMI. As previously mentioned,
these practices may be used in response to the child’s behavior . In
either case, the use of certain feeding practices might be sub ject
to additional considerations such as ethnicity, socioecon omic
status, age, and gender. Thus, it is possible that the ways in
which researchers refer to these common feeding practices ma sk
the complexity of the parent-child interaction and the variou s
strategies parents may use with their children to inﬂuence ea ting
behavior (
Tovar et al., 2013 ). This complex interaction between
parent and child traits may explain why the use of feeding
practices may diﬀer even between siblings living in the same
household (
Saelens et al., 2000; Farrow et al., 2009 ).
Limitations
The search applied in this review only identiﬁed peer-reviewed
papers published in English. It is possible that relevant studie s in
other languages, as part of a thesis, or in journals not indexe d in
the databases searched may not have been identiﬁed.
A limitation of the present review was the lack of studies which
investigated feeding practices such as modeling, use of rewar ds,
instrumental, and emotional feeding (see
Gevers et al., 2014 for
a more complete list). A possible explanation for this is the rigi d
criteria applied for the review which excluded papers where body
weight of the child was not one of the main outcomes of the study.
Therefore, a range of studies have investigated diﬀerent fee ding
practices, but if measured BMI was not provided then these were
not included here.
A signiﬁcant limitation identiﬁed in this review is the lack of
consensus among researchers, ﬁrstly in applying the deﬁnition s
of the constructs and in identifying “gold standard” measur es
for assessing parenting and feeding behaviors. Parenting st yles,
feeding styles, and feeding practices were conceptualized in
the literature via a range of deﬁnitions and thus the ability
to draw conclusions across such diverse ways of measuring
each element as it links to child weight is challenging.
Blissett
(2011) reports that the literature has been clouded by the
various ways concepts are deﬁned or applied, it is therefore
important to ensure that standard, agreed deﬁnitions are used
in this ﬁeld. Similarly,
V aughn et al. (2013) identiﬁed 71
instruments to measure feeding practices, with some having
better reliability and validity than others. The authors hi ghlight
that although many measures are similar in content, they var y
enough to make it diﬃcult to compare results across studies.
For this reason, a reliable, validated “gold standard” meas ure for
assessing feeding practices would facilitate future researc h in this
ﬁeld.
Since ﬁndings from the studies in this review are based almos t
entirely on parent-report, there is a risk of biased or inaccur ate
outcomes, with parents potentially misreporting their behavior s
due to lack of awareness, social desirability bias, or diﬀere nces in
use of rather subjective scales (e.g., diﬀerences in interpre tation
of how much is “often”). Further, a recent review by
Bergmeier
et al. (2015) found that across several observational studies,
parents’ reports of their feeding practices on a questionnaire
were not correlated with the frequency of practices observed. The
most commonly used questionnaire assessing feeding practices in
the studies reviewed was the CFQ. Although this questionnai re
has been previously validated, it addresses parental perception s
of how they feed their children and does not provide direct
measures of these behaviors. Some of the questions may asses s
parents’ attitudes more than their actual behaviors. For exa mple,
items such as “If I did not guide or regulate my child’s eating ,
she would eat too much of her favorite foods” or “I have to
be especially careful to make sure my child eats enough” are
perhaps measuring parents’ concern about child weight more
than the frequency with which parents are using a particular
feeding practice (restriction or pressure to eat, respectively, in the
examples above). This may explain why scores on these scales
are so well correlated with child weight status, but may not
accurately reﬂect the parents’ mealtime behavior, and there fore
the actual association between feeding practices and child weight.
A heavy reliance on self-report measures may underpin cross-
cultural diﬀerences in studies, due to potential diﬀerences in
participant response style. In such circumstances, observati onal
studies would be particularly valuable.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 16 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
Since many of the studies were cross-sectional, the ability
to attribute causality to the ﬁndings is limited Gerards and
Kremers, 2015 . Since a child’s development is shaped by the
reciprocal interactions between parent and child ( Sleddens et al.,
2011; Skouteris et al., 2012 ), recognizing that parents may be
responding to child attributes could be valuable in designin g
bi-directional longitudinal studies.
Another limitation is the wide range of ages we addressed
(4–12 years). It is possible that some feeding practices may have a
larger impact at particular periods of child development, whereas
they may have diﬀerent eﬀects at other time points. For example,
young children may beneﬁt from restriction (
Campbell et al.,
2010) and an authoritative parenting ( Vereecken et al., 2004 )
simply as they require more guidance, whereas as the child
ages, such practices may cease to be beneﬁcial as the child’s
autonomy increases (
Savage et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, little is
known about the stability of feeding styles and practices ove r
time. Parenting and feeding styles measured within a cross-
sectional study provide some insight into a limited period, bu t
this cannot be assumed to be static. It is likely that parents a djust
their approach to feeding as children develop and as they adopt
diﬀerent eating habits through experience within and beyond the
family setting. This provides further support for the need for
more longitudinal studies in this area.
Finally, this systematic review addressed the importance of
modiﬁable factors, namely parenting styles and feeding practices,
on children’s body weight. Although theoretically feeding styles
may be more diﬃcult to modify than individual feeding practices,
there is no evidence thus far to prove that feeding styles are
stable and set. In contrast, the ﬁndings that mothers with
higher education levels have diﬀerent feeding styles compare d
to less educated mothers (e.g.,
Saxton et al., 2009 ) suggests
that environmental factors, potentially including educati onal
interventions, could inﬂuence parents’ feeding styles. Fut ure
research could explore if and how feeding styles can be modiﬁe d
through intervention.
Future Work
One of the key messages from this review is that the ways in
which parents feed their children may be inﬂuenced by child
characteristics such as food approach or avoidance tendencie s.
However, most studies to date have been conducted cross-
sectionally, making it diﬃcult to draw conclusions about th e
directionality of the associations between feeding practic es
and child characteristics. Longitudinal studies are requi red to
ascertain the long term, reciprocal nature of parenting, feed ing
styles, practices, and child characteristics on child BMI. St udies
which include measures of child appetitive traits, temperamen t
as well as parental eating behaviors are important so that
parenting and feeding styles are understood within the broad er
context of the parent-child interaction. Therefore, develo ping
measures to assess both child and parent eating behaviors and
mealtime interaction is crucial for future research. By bet ter
understanding the roles of feeding styles and feeding practi ces
and their interactions with other family factors, clinician s will be
better able to counsel families in adopting appropriate feeding
practices.
Most of the studies have relied on parent report of
their feeding practices and direct observation has been
mostly restricted to small scale laboratory-based studies . The
development of new technologies for collecting video data
through the internet may present opportunities for researcher s
to ﬁlm meals in more natural settings. User-friendly webcams or
smartphone cameras used during family meal occasions provide
a novel platform to complement questionnaire studies to assess
parental styles, feeding styles, and feeding practices in the home
or other more natural environments.
Culture, ethnicity and SES have been associated with
parenting and feeding behaviors (
Tovar et al., 2013 ), however,
only a limited number of studies have included participants fr om
diverse backgrounds. As levels of obesity are inversely ass ociated
with SES, it is crucial to include more families from less aﬄu ent
populations. At the same time, research conducted in diverse
cultures and varying locations will enhance our understand ing
of the risk of obesity globally.
Finally, as much of the research focuses on mothers’
interactions with children during mealtimes, studies of fa thers
are warranted to identify gender diﬀerences in parenting, feeding
styles, and practices (
Tschann et al., 2013; Khandpur et al.,
2014). Similarly the role of other carers in the child’s life is
also important to consider. With many children raised in dual-
career or single-parent households, the mother is not necessar ily
the primary caregiver who is providing the child’s meals and
these other caregivers may be important targets for future
interventions.
To conclude, parenting styles, feeding styles, and parenting
practices have been associated with child BMI. Protective
eﬀects of authoritative parenting and feeding styles might oc cur
as a function of the limit setting, structure, and guidance
applied in feeding situations; the limits are used to assist
children in learning about food and setting the foundation f or
healthy eating.
Grolnick and Pomerantz (2009) propose that
parents who set limits rather than providing free access to
foods at home are oﬀering children guidance and structure.
Children may need this level of support and guidance to
facilitate the formation of healthy eating habits. Speciﬁc fee ding
practices may be used in response to child appetite and
temperament; and so child eating traits should be measured in
future research. Finally, interventions which are built ar ound
authoritative parenting, setting limits, and guiding intake
toward healthier foods may help to prevent overweight and
obesity.
FUNDING
Award number RG.PSYC.103988 to University of Leeds from
Nestec SA, Nestlé, Vevey, Switzerland. Support for postdoctoral
training in systematic research reviews for Dr. Netalie Shl oim.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 17 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
REFERENCES
Bergmeier, H., Skouteris, H., and Hetherington, M. (2015). Systema tic research
review of observational approaches used to evaluate mother-child me altime
interactions during preschool years. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 101, 7–15. doi:
10.3945/ajcn.114.092114
Beydoun, M. A., and Wang, Y. (2009). Parent-child dietary intak e resemblance in
the United States: evidence from a large representative survey. Soc. Sci. Med. 68,
2137–2144 doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.03.029
Birch, L. L., and Fisher, J. O. (1998). Development of eating beh aviors among
children and adolescents. Pediatrics 101(Suppl. 2), 539–549.
Birch, L. L., Fisher, J. O., Grimm-Thomas, K., Markey, C. N., Sawye r, R.,
and Johnson, S. L. (2001). Conﬁrmatory factor analysis of the Chi ld
Feeding Questionnaire: a measure of parental attitudes, beliefs a nd practices
about child feeding and obesity proneness. Appetite 36, 201–210. doi:
10.1006/appe.2001.0398
Blissett, J. (2011). Relationships between parenting style, feed ing style and feeding
practices and fruit and vegetable consumption in early childhood. Appetite 57,
826–831. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2011.05.318
Blissett, J., and Bennett, C. (2013). Cultural diﬀerences in parental feeding practices
and children’s eating behaviours and their relationships with ch ild BMI:
a comparison of Black Afro-Caribbean, White British and White German
samples. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 67, 180–184. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2012.198
Brown, R., and Ogden, J. (2004). Children’s eating attitudes an d behaviour: a study
of the modelling and control theories of parental inﬂuence. Health Educ. Res.
19, 261–271. doi: 10.1093/her/cyg040
Campbell, K., Andrianopoulos, N., Hesketh, K., Ball, K., Crawford, D., Bre nnan,
L., et al. (2010). Parental use of restrictive feeding practices an d child
BMI z-score. A 3-year prospective cohort study. Appetite 55, 84–88. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2010.04.006
Campbell, K. J., Crawford, D. A., and Ball, K. (2006). Family food environment and
dietary behaviors likely to promote fatness in 5–6 year-old children. Int. J. Obes.
30, 1272–1280. doi: 10.1038/sj.ijo.0803266
Cardel, M., Willig, A. L., Dulin-Keita, A., Casazza, K., Beasley, T . M., and
Fernández, J. R. (2012). Parental feeding practices and socioeconomic status are
associated with child adiposity in a multi-ethnic sample of children.Appetite 58,
347–353. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2011.11.005
Clark, H. R., Goyder, E., Bissell, P., Blank, L., and Peters, J. (2007). How do parents’
child-feeding behaviours inﬂuence child weight? Implications f or childhood
obesity policy. J. Public Health 29, 132–141. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fdm012
Collins, C., Duncanson, K., and Burrows, T. (2014). A systematic re view
investigating associations between parenting style and child feeding behaviours.
J. Hum. Nutr. Diet. 27, 557–568. doi: 10.1111/jhn.12192
Cooke, L. J., Wardle, J., Gibson, E. L., Sapochnik, M., Sheiham, A ., and Lawson,
M. (2004). Demographic, familial and trait predictors of fruit and veg etable
consumption by pre-school children. Public Health Nutr. 7, 295–302. doi:
10.1079/phn2003527
Costa, F. S., Pino, D. L. D., and Friedman, R. (2011). Caregivers ’ attitudes and
practices: inﬂuence on childhood body weight. J. Biosoc. Sci. 43, 369–378. doi:
10.1017/S0021932011000022
Craigie, A. M., Lake, A. A., Kelly, S. A., Adamson, A. J., and Mathe rs, J. C.
(2011). Tracking of obesity-related behaviours from childhood t o adulthood: a
systematic review. Maturitas 70, 266–284. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.08.005
Darling, N., and Steinberg, L. (1993). Parenting style as contex t: an integrative
model. Psychol. Bull. 113, 487–496. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.113.3.487
De Bourdeaudhuij, I., te Velde, S., Brug, J., Due, P., Wind, M., S andvik, C.,
et al. (2008). Personal, social and environmental predictors of da ily fruit and
vegetable intake in 11-year-old children in nine European countrie s. Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr. 62, 834–841. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602794
Dev, D. A., McBride, B. A., Fiese, B. H., Jones, B. L., Cho, H., and Behalf Of
The Strong Kids Research Team (2013). Risk factors for overwei ght/obesity
in preschool children: an ecological approach. Child. Obes. 9, 399–408. doi:
10.1089/chi.2012.0150
Faith, M. S., Scanlon, K. S., Birch, L. L., Francis, L. A., and Sh erry, B.
(2004). Parent −child feeding strategies and their relationships to child
eating and weight status. Obes. Res. 12, 1711–1722. doi: 10.1038/oby.
2004.212
Farrow, C. V., Galloway, A. T., and Fraser, K. (2009). Sibling eating behaviours and
diﬀerential child feeding practices reported by parents. Appetite 52, 307–312.
doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2008.10.009
Frankel, L. A., O’Connor, T. M., Chen, T. A., Nicklas, T., Power, T. G., and
Hughes, S. O. (2014). Parents’ perceptions of preschool children’s a bility
to regulate eating. Feeding style diﬀerences. Appetite 76, 166–174. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2014.01.077
Gerards, S. M. P. L., and Kremers, S. P. J. (2015). The role of food paren ting skills
and the home food environment in children’s weight gain and obesit y. Curr.
Obes. Rep. 4, 30–36. doi: 10.1007/s13679-015-0139-x
Gevers, D. W. M., Kremers, S. P. J., de Vries, N. K., and van Assema,
P. (2014). Clarifying concepts of food parenting practices. A Delphi
study with an application to snacking behavior. Appetite 79, 51–57. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2014.04.002
Grolnick, W. S., and Pomerantz, E. M. (2009). Issues and challenges in studying
parental control: toward a new conceptualization. Child Dev. Perspect. 3,
165–170. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2009.00099.x
Gubbels, J. S., Kremers, S. P., Staﬂeu, A., de Vries, S. I., Goldboh m, R. A.,
Dagnelie, P. C., et al. (2011). Association between parenting prac tices and
children’s dietary intake, activity behavior and development of b ody mass
index: the KOALA Birth Cohort Study. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 8:18. doi:
10.1186/1479-5868-8-18
Hancock, K. J., Lawrence, D., and Zubrick, S. R. (2014). Higher ma ternal
protectiveness is associated with higher odds of child overweig ht and
obesity: a longitudinal Australian study. PLoS ONE 9:e100686. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0100686
Hart, C. N., Cairns, A., and Jelalian, E. (2011). Sleep and obesity in
children and adolescents. Pediatr. Clin. North Am. 58, 715–733. doi:
10.1016/j.pcl.2011.03.007
Hennessy, E., Hughes, S. O., Goldberg, J. P., Hyatt, R. R., and Eco nomos,
C. D. (2010). Parent behavior and child weight status among a
diverse group of underserved rural families. Appetite 54, 369–377. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2010.01.004
Hetherington, M. M., and Cecil, J. E. (2010). Gene-environment in teractions in
obesity. Forum Nutr. 63, 195–203. doi: 10.1159/000264407
Ho, M., Garnett, S. P., Baur, L., Burrows, T., Stewart, L., Neve, M. , et al. (2012).
Eﬀectiveness of lifestyle interventions in child obesity: sys tematic review with
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 130, e1647–e1671. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-1176
Holland, J. C., Kolko, R. P., Stein, R. I., Welch, R. R., Perri, M. G., S chechtman,
K. B., et al. (2014). Modiﬁcations in parent feeding practices and child diet
during family −based behavioral treatment improve child zBMI. Obesity 22,
E119–E126. doi: 10.1002/oby.20708
Hughes, S. O., Patrick, H., Power, T. G., Fisher, J. O., Anderson , C. B.,
and Nicklas, T. A. (2007). The impact of child care providers’ feedin g
on children’s food consumption. J. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 28, 100–107. doi:
10.1097/01.DBP.0000267561.34199.a9
Hughes, S. O., Power, T. G., Fisher, J. O., Mueller, S., and Nickla s, T. A. (2005).
Revisiting a neglected construct: parenting styles in a child-fee ding context.
Appetite 44, 83–92. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2004.08.007
Hughes, S. O., Power, T. G., Papaioannou, M. A., Cross, M. B., Nic klas, T. A., Hall,
S. K., et al. (2011). Emotional climate, feeding practices, and fee ding styles: an
observational analysis of the dinner meal in Head Start families. Int. J. Behav.
Nutr. Phys. Act. 8:60. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-8-60
Hughes, S. O., Shewchuk, R. M., Baskin, M. L., Nicklas, T. A., an d Qu, H. (2008).
Indulgent feeding style and children’s weight status in preschool. J. Dev. Behav.
Pediatr. 29, 403–410. doi: 10.1097/DBP.0b013e318182a976
Hurley, K. M., Cross, M. B., and Hughes, S. O. (2011). A systematic rev iew of
responsive feeding and child obesity in high-income countries. J. Nutr. 141,
495–501. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.130047
Jansen, P. W., Roza, S. J., Jaddoe, V. W., Mackenbach, J. D., R aat, H., Hofman, A.,
et al. (2012). Children’s eating behavior, feeding practices of pa rents and weight
problems in early childhood: results from the population-based Generation R
Study. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 9, 130–130. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-9-130
Jansen, P. W., Tharner, A., van der Ende, J., Wake, M., Raat, H., Hofman,
A., et al. (2014). Feeding practices and child weight: is the asso ciation
bidrectional in preschool children? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 100, 1329–1336. doi:
10.3945/ajcn.114.088922
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 18 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
Johnson, R., Welk, G., Saint-Maurice, P. F., and Ihmels, M. (2012 ). Parenting
styles and home obesogenic environments. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
9, 1411–1426. doi: 10.3390/ijerph9041411
Karp, S. M., Barry, K. M., Gesell, S. B., Po’e, E. K., Dietrich, M. S., a nd Barkin,
S. L. (2014). Parental feeding patterns and child weight status f or Latino
preschoolers. Obes. Res. Clin. Pract. 8, e88–e97. doi: 10.1016/j.orcp.2012.08.193
Khandpur, N., Blaine, R. E., Fisher, J. O., and Davison, K. K. (2 014). Fathers’
child feeding practices: a review of the evidence. Appetite 78, 110–121. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2014.03.015
Kremers, S. P., Brug, J., de Vries, H., and Engels, R. C. (2003). Paren ting style
and adolescent fruit consumption. Appetite 41, 43–50. doi: 10.1016/s0195-
6663(03)00038-2
Larsen, J. K., Hermans, R. C., Sleddens, E. F., Engels, R. C., Fishe r, J. O., and
Kremers, S. S. (2015). How parental dietary behavior and food parenti ng
practices aﬀect children’s dietary behavior. Interacting sources of inﬂuence?
Appetite 89, 246–257. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2015.02.012
Lee, H., and Keller, K. L. (2012). Children who are pressured to eat at ho me
consume fewer high-fat foods in laboratory test meals. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet. 112,
271–275. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.10.021
Lloyd, L. J., Langley-Evans, S. C., and McMullen, S. (2012). Child hood obesity and
risk of the adult metabolic syndrome: a systematic review. Int. J. Obes. 36, 1–11.
doi: 10.1038/ijo.2011.186
Maccoby, E., and Martin, J. (1983). “Socialization in the cont ext of the family:
parent–child interaction, ” in Handbook of Child Psychology, ed P. H. Mussen
(New York, NY: Wiley), 1–101.
Magee, L., and Hale, L. (2012). Longitudinal associations be tween sleep duration
and subsequent weight gain: a systematic review. Sleep Med. Rev. 16, 231–241.
doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2011.05.005
Manan, W. M. W. A., Norazawati, A. K., and Lee Y. Y. (2012). Overw eight
and obesity among Malay primary school children in Kota Bharu, Kelantan :
parental beliefs, attitudes and child feeding practices. Mal. J. Nutr. 18,
27–36.
Marshall, S., Golley, R., and Hendrie, G. (2011). Expanding the unde rstanding
of how parenting inﬂuences the dietary intake and weight status of children:
a cross −sectional study. Nutr. Diet. 68, 127–133. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-
0080.2011.01512.x
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaﬀ, J., and Altman, D. G. (2009). Pre ferred reporting
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA state ment. Ann.
Intern. Med. 151, 264–269. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-0 0135
Moore, C. L. (2012). The Caring Experience of Staﬀ Carers Working with
Adults with Learning Disability and Dementia . DClinPsy Thesis, University of
Liverpool, Available from Hydra. (Accessed 13 February, 2014).
Murashima, M., Hoerr, S. L., Hughes, S. O., and Kaplowitz, S. (2011).Conﬁrmatory
factor analysis of a questionnaire measuring control in parental fe eding
practices in mothers of Head Start children. Appetite 56, 594–601. doi: 10.1016/
j.appet.2011.01.031
Murashima, M., Hoerr, S. L., Hughes, S. O., Kattelmann, K. K., and Phi llips, B. W.
(2012). Maternal parenting behaviors during childhood relate to we ight status
and fruit and vegetable intake of college students. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 44,
556–563. doi: 10.1016/j.jneb.2011.05.008
Musher-Eizenman, D., and Holub, S. (2007). Comprehensive feeding practices
questionnaire: validation of a new measure of parental feeding pract ices.
J. Pediatr. Psychol. 32, 960–972. doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsm037
Ng, M., Fleming, T., Robinson, M., Thomson, B., Graetz, N., Margo no, C., et al.
(2014). Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity
in children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 384, 766–781. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(14)60460-8
Noor, A. M., Leelavathi, M., Shamsul, A. S., Hizlinda, T., Khairani , O., and
Fatimah, A. (2012). Parental concerns and control in feeding of 9 to 12-year-
old children in a primary school in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.Malays. J. Nutr. 18,
47–55.
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K., and Flegal, K. M. (2014). Prev alence
of childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011-2012. JAMA 311,
806–814. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.732
Olvera, N., and Power, T. G. (2010). Brief report: parenting styles and obesity
in Mexican American children: a longitudinal study. J. Pediatr. Psychol. 35,
243–249. doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsp071
Özçetin, M., Yilmaz, R., Erkorkmaz, Ü., and Esmeray, H. (2010). Reliabi lity and
validity study of parental feeding style questionnaire. Turk Pediatri Ars. 45,
124–131. doi: 10.4274/tpa.45.124
Rodenburg, G., Kremers, S. P., Oenema, A., and van de Mheen, D. (2 011).
Psychological control by parents is associated with a higher chi ld weight. Int.
J. Pediatr. Obes. 6, 442–449. doi: 10.3109/17477166.2011.590203
Rodenburg, G., Kremers, S. P., Oenema, A., and van de Mheen, D.
(2012). Associations of children’s appetitive traits with weigh t and dietary
behaviours in the context of general parenting. PLoS ONE 7:e50642. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0050642
Rollins, B. Y., Loken, E., Savage, J. S., and Birch, L. L. (2014) . Maternal controlling
feeding practices and girls’ inhibitory control interact to predict changes in BMI
and eating in the absence of hunger from 5 to 7 y.Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 99, 249–257.
doi: 10.3945/ajcn.113.063545
Saelens, B. E., Ernst, M. M., and Epstein, L. H. (2000). Maternal ch ild feeding
practices and obesity: a discordant sibling analysis. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 27,
459–463. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-108X(200005)27:4 <459::AID-EAT11>3.0.
CO;2-C
Savage, J. S., Fisher, J. O., and Birch, L. L. (2007). Parental inﬂuence on
eating behavior: conception to adolescence. J. Law Med. Ethics 35, 22. doi:
10.1111/j.1748-720X.2007.00111.x
Saxton, J., Carnell, S., van Jaarsveld, C. H., and Wardle, J. (2009). Maternal
education is associated with feeding style. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 109, 894–898. doi:
10.1016/j.jada.2009.02.010
Skouteris, H., McCabe, M., Ricciardelli, L. A., Milgrom, J., Baur, L. A.,
Aksan, N., et al. (2012). Parent–child interactions and obesity prevention: a
systematic review of the literature. Early Child Dev. Care 182, 153–174. doi:
10.1080/03004430.2010.548606
Sleddens, E. F., Gerards, S. M., Thijs, C., Vries, N. K., and Kremers , S. P. (2011).
General parenting, childhood overweight and obesity −inducing behaviors: a
review. Int. J. Pediatr. Obes. 6, e12–e27. doi: 10.3109/17477166.2011.566339
Stang, J., and Loth, K. A. (2011). Parenting style and child feed ing practices:
potential mitigating factors in the etiology of childhood obesi ty. J. Am. Diet.
Assoc. 111, 1301–1305. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2011.06.010
Steinberg, L., Elmen, J. D., and Mounts, N. S. (1989). Authorita tive parenting,
psychosocial maturity, and academic success among adolescents. Child Dev. 60,
1424–1436. doi: 10.2307/1130932
Taylor, A., Wilson, C., Slater, A., and Mohr, P. (2011). Parent-a nd child-reported
parenting. Associations with child weight-related outcomes. Appetite 57,
700–706. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2011.08.014
Thompson, M. E. (2010). Parental feeding and childhood obesity i n preschool-age
children: recent ﬁndings from the literature. Issues Compr. Pediatr. Nurs. 33,
205–267. doi: 10.3109/01460862.2010.530057
Tovar, A., Hennessy, E., Pirie, A., Must, A., Gute, D. M., Hyatt, R. R., et al.
(2012). Feeding styles and child weight status among recent immigrant mother-
child dyads. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 9, 62–69. doi: 10.1186/1479-
5868-9-62
Tovar, A., Must, A., Metayer, N., Gute, D. M., Pirie, A., Hyatt, R. R., et al.
(2013). Immigrating to the US: what Brazilian, Latin American and Hai tian
women have to say about changes to their lifestyle that may be asso ciated
with obesity. J. Immigr. Minor. Health , 15, 357–364. doi: 10.1007/s10903-012-
9665-8
Tovar, A., V aughn, A., and Ward, D. (2015). “Children’s inﬂuenc e on home child
care provider’s feeding practices: exploring bi-directional inﬂuen ces ISBNPA, ”
in Conference Proceedings (Edinburgh).
Tschann, J. M., Gregorich, S. E., Penilla, C., Pasch, L. A., de Groa t, C. L., Flores,
E., et al. (2013). Parental feeding practices in Mexican American f amilies:
initial test of an expanded measure. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 10:6. doi:
10.1186/1479-5868-10-6
V aughn, A. E., Tabak, R. G., Bryant, M. J., and Ward, D. S. (2013) . Measuring
parent food practices: a systematic review of existing measures and examination
of instruments. Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 10:61. doi: 10.1186/1479-586
8-10-61
Ventura, A. K., and Birch, L. L. (2008). Does parenting aﬀect chi ldren’s eating and
weight status? Int. J. Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 5:15. doi: 10.1186/1479-5868-5-15
Vereecken, C. A., Keukelier, E., and Maes, L. (2004). Inﬂuence of mother’s
educational level on food parenting practices and food habits of young children.
Appetite 43, 93–103. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2004.04.002
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 19 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849
Shloim et al. Parenting, Feeding and Obesity Status
Vollmer, R. L., and Mobley, A. R. (2013). Parenting styles, feeding
styles, and their inﬂuence on child obesogenic behaviors and
body weight. A review. Appetite 71, 232–241. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.
2013.08.015
Wang, Y., Beydoun, M. A., Li, J., Liu, Y., and Moreno, L. A. (201 1). Do children
and their parents eat a similar diet? Resemblance in child and parental dietary
intake: systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Epidemiol. Community Health
65, 177–189. doi: 10.1136/jech.2009.095901
Wardle, J., Sanderson, S., Guthrie, C. A., Rapoport, L., and Plomin, R . (2002).
Parental feeding style and the inter −generational transmission of obesity risk.
Obes. Res. 10, 453–462. doi: 10.1038/oby.2002.63
Webber, L., Cooke, L., Hill, C., and Wardle, J. (2010a). Associati ons between
children’s appetitive traits and maternal feeding practices. J. Am. Diet. Assoc.
110, 1718–1722. doi: 10.1016/j.jada.2010.08.007
Webber, L., Cooke, L., Hill, C., and Wardle, J. (2010b). Child adipos ity and
maternal feeding practices: a longitudinal analysis. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92,
1423–1428. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2010.30112
Webber, L., Hill, C., Cooke, L., Carnell, S., and Wardle, J. (2010c). A ssociations
between child weight and maternal feeding styles are mediated by
maternal perceptions and concerns. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 64, 259–265. doi:
10.1038/ejcn.2009.146
Wehrly, S. E., Bonilla, C., Perez, M., and Liew, J. (2014). Controllin g
parental feeding practices and child body composition in ethnically
and economically diverse preschool children. Appetite 73, 163–171. doi:
10.1016/j.appet.2013.11.009
Yilmaz, R., Erkorkmaz, Ü., Özçetin, M., and Karaaslan, E. (2013). How d oes
parents’ visual perception of their child’s weight status aﬀect t heir feeding style.
Nutr. Hosp. 28, 741–746. doi: 10.3305/nh.2013.28.3.6358
Zhang, L., and McIntosh, W. A. (2011). Children’s weight statu s and maternal
and paternal feeding practices. J. Child Health Care 15, 389–400. doi:
10.1177/1367493511414448
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2015 Shloim, Edelson, Martin and Hetherington. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the ori ginal publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic prac tice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with thes e terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 20 December 2015 | Volume 6 | Article 1849