© 2020 Joule Inc. or its licensors   CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E875
O
besity is a complex chronic disease in which abnormal 
or excess body fat (adiposity) impairs health, 
increases the risk of long-term medical complications 
and reduces lifespan. 1 Epidemiologic studies define obesity 
using the body mass index (BMI;  weight/height 2), which can 
stratify obesity-related health risks at the population level. 
Obesity is operationally defined as a BMI exceeding 30 kg/m 2 
and is subclassified into class 1 (30–34.9), class 2 (35–39.9) and 
class  3 (≥   40). At the population level, health complications 
from excess body fat increase as BMI increases. 2 At the individ-
ual level, complications occur because of excess adiposity, 
location and distribution of adiposity and many other factors, 
including environmental, genetic, biologic and socioeconomic 
factors (Box 1). 11
Over the past 3 decades, the prevalence of obesity has steadily 
increased throughout the world,12 and in Canada, it has increased 
threefold since 1985.13 Importantly, severe obesity has increased 
more than fourfold and, in 2016, affected an estimated 1.9 million 
Canadian adults.13
Obesity has become a major public health issue that 
increases health care costs 14,15 and negatively affects physical 
and psychological health. 16 People with obesity experience per-
vasive weight bias and stigma, which contributes (independent 
of weight or BMI) to increased morbidity and mortality.17
Obesity is caused by the complex interplay of multiple 
genetic, metabolic, behavioural and environmental factors, with 
the latter thought to be the proximate cause of the substantial 
GUIDELINE
Obesity in adults: a clinical practice guideline
Sean Wharton MD, David C.W. Lau MD PhD, Michael Vallis PhD RPsych, Arya M. Sharma MD PhD,  
Laurent Biertho MD, Denise Campbell-Scherer MD PhD, Kristi Adamo PhD, Angela Alberga PhD,  
Rhonda Bell PhD, Normand Boulé PhD, Elaine Boyling PhD, Jennifer Brown RD MSc, Betty Calam MD,  
Carol Clarke RD MHSc, Lindsay Crowshoe MD, Dennis Divalentino MD, Mary Forhan OT PhD, Yoni Freedhoff MD, 
Michel Gagner MD, Stephen Glazer MD, Cindy Grand MPH, Michael Green MD MPH, Margaret Hahn MD PhD, 
Raed Hawa MD MSc, Rita Henderson PhD, Dennis Hong MD, Pam Hung MScOT BSc, Ian Janssen PhD,  
Kristen Jacklin PhD, Carlene Johnson-Stoklossa RD MSc, Amy Kemp BKin BA, Sara Kirk PhD, Jennifer Kuk PhD, 
Marie-France Langlois MD, Scott Lear PhD, Ashley McInnes PhD, David Macklin MD, Leen Naji MD,  
Priya Manjoo MD, Marie-Philippe Morin MD, Kara Nerenberg MD MSc, Ian Patton PhD, Sue Pedersen MD,  
Leticia Pereira PhD, Helena Piccinini-Vallis MD PhD, Megha Poddar MD, Paul Poirier MD, Denis Prud’homme MD MSc, 
Ximena Ramos Salas PhD, Christian Rueda-Clausen MD PhD, Shelly Russell-Mayhew PhD RPsych, Judy Shiau MD, 
Diana Sherifali RN PhD, John Sievenpiper MD PhD, Sanjeev Sockalingam MD MHPE, Valerie Taylor MD PhD, 
Ellen Toth MD, Laurie Twells PhD, Richard Tytus MD, Shahebina Walji MD, Leah Walker BA RCT, Sonja Wicklum MD 
n Cite as: CMAJ 2020 August 4;192:E875-91. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.191707
This article is available in French at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1503/cmaj.191707/-/DC1
CMAJ Podcasts: author interview at https://www.cmaj.ca/lookup/doi/10.1503/cmaj.191707/tab-related-content
KEY POINTS
• Obesity is a prevalent, complex, progressive and relapsing 
chronic disease, characterized by abnormal or excessive body 
fat (adiposity), that impairs health.
• People living with obesity face substantial bias and stigma, 
which contribute to increased morbidity and mortality 
independent of weight or body mass index.
• This guideline update reflects substantial advances in the 
epidemiology, determinants, pathophysiology, assessment, 
prevention and treatment of obesity, and shifts the focus of 
obesity management toward improving patient-centred health 
outcomes, rather than weight loss alone.
• Obesity care should be based on evidence-based principles of 
chronic disease management, must validate patients’ lived 
experiences, move beyond simplistic approaches of “eat less, 
move more,” and address the root drivers of obesity.
• People living with obesity should have access to evidence-informed 
interventions, including medical nutrition therapy, physical activity, 
psychological interventions, pharmacotherapy and surgery.
CPD
GUIDELINE
E876 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
rise in the prevalence of obesity.18,19 A better understanding of the 
biological underpinnings of this disease has emerged in recent 
years.19 The brain plays a central role in energy homeostasis by 
regulating food intake and energy expenditure (Box 2).24
Decreased food intake and increased physical activity lead to a 
negative energy balance and trigger a cascade of metabolic and 
neurohormonal adaptive mechanisms. 25,26 Therapies that target 
these alterations in neurohormonal mechanisms can become 
effective tools in the long-term management of obesity.27
Novel approaches to diagnose and assess obesity in clinical 
practice have been proposed.11,18,19,28 Although BMI is widely used 
to assess and classify obesity (adiposity), it is not an accurate tool 
for identifying adiposity-related complications.19 Waist circumfer-
ence has been independently associated with an increase in car-
diovascular risk, but it is not a good predictor of visceral adipose 
tissue on an individual basis. 29 Integration of both BMI and waist 
circumference in clinical assessment may identify the higher-risk 
phenotype of obesity better than either BMI or waist circumfer-
ence alone, particularly in those individuals with lower BMI.30,31 In 
addition to BMI and waist circumference measurements, a com-
prehensive history to identify the root causes of obesity, appropri-
ate physical examination and relevant laboratory investigations 
will help to identify those who will benefit from treatment.32
The Edmonton obesity staging system has been proposed to 
guide clinical decisions from the obesity assessment and at each 
BMI category (Appendix 1, available at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/
suppl/doi:10.1503/cmaj.191707/-/DC2). 28 This 5-stage system of 
obesity classification considers metabolic, physical and psycho-
logical parameters to determine the optimal obesity treatment. 
In population studies, it has been shown to be a better predictor 
of all-cause mortality when compared with BMI or waist circum-
ference measurements alone.33,34
There is a recognition that obesity management should be 
about improved health and well-being, and not just weight 
loss. 34–36  Because the existing literature is based mainly on 
weight-loss outcomes, several recommendations in this guide-
line are weight-loss centred. However, more research is needed 
to shift the focus of obesity management toward improving 
patient-centred health outcomes, rather than weight loss alone.
Despite growing evidence that obesity is a serious chronic 
disease, it is not effectively managed within our current health 
system. 37,38 Canadian health professionals feel ill equipped to 
support people living with obesity. 39–41  Biased beliefs about 
obesity also affect the level and quality of health care that 
patients with obesity receive. 42 The dominant cultural narrative 
regarding obesity fuels assumptions about personal 
irresponsibility and lack of willpower and casts blame and shame 
upon people living with obesity. 41 Importantly, obesity stigma 
negatively influences the level and quality of care for people 
living with obesity.42
With increased knowledge of the disease state and better 
approaches to assess and manage obesity, it is timely to update 
the 2006 Canadian clinical practice guideline. 43 The goal of this 
update is to disseminate to primary care practitioners evidence-
informed options for assessing and treating people living with 
obesity. Importantly, this guideline incorporates the perspectives 
of people with lived experience and of interprofessional primary 
care providers with those of experts on obesity management, and 
researchers. This article is a summary of the full guideline, which 
is available online (http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/).
Scope
The target users for this guideline are primary health care pro-
fessionals. The guideline may also be used by policy-makers 
and people affected by obesity and their families. The guide-
line is focused on obesity in adults. The recommendations are 
intended to serve as a guide for health care providers; clinical 
discretion should be used by all who adopt these recommen-
dations. Resource limitations and individual patient prefer-
ences may make it difficult to put every recommendation into 
practice, but the guideline is intended to improve the standard 
of, and access to, care for individuals with obesity in all regions 
of Canada.
Box 1: Complications of obesity
Adipose tissue not only influences the central regulation of energy 
homeostasis, but excessive adiposity can also become 
dysfunctional and predispose the individual to the development of 
many medical complications, such as:
• Type 2 diabetes3
• Gallbladder disease4
• Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease5
• Gout6
Excess and ectopic body fat are important sources of 
adipocytokines and inflammatory mediators that can alter glucose 
and fat metabolism, leading to increased cardiometabolic and 
cancer risks, and thereby reducing disease-free duration and life 
expectancy by 6 to 14 years.1,7,8 It is estimated that 20% of all 
cancers can be attributed to obesity, independent of diet.9 Obesity 
increases the risk of the following cancers:10
• Colon (both sexes)
• Kidney (both sexes)
• Esophagus (both sexes)
• Endometrium (women)
• Postmenopausal breast (women)
Box 2: Appetite regulation20–23
• The control of appetite is complex and involves the integration 
of the central neural circuits including the hypothalamus 
(homeostatic control), the mesolimbic system (hedonic control) 
and the frontal lobe (executive control).
• The crosstalk between homeostatic and hedonic eating is 
influenced by mediators from adipose tissue, the pancreas, gut 
and other organs.
• Cognitive functions in the prefrontal cortex exert executive 
control on food choices and the decision to eat. The 
interconnectivity of these neural networks drives eating 
behaviour and has been shown to be altered in obesity.
1  ASK 
 PERMISSION 
  “Would it be all right 
  if we discussed 
  your weight?” 
  Asking permission
  •  Shows compassion and empathy
  •  Builds patient–provider trust 
AGREE ON GOALS
Collaborate on a personalized, 
sustainable action plan 
4
 ASSIST WITH DRIVERS   
 AND BARRIERS 5
OBESITY 
IN ADULTS 
A clinical practice guideline
 ▼ health  ▼ quality of life  ▼ lifespan
BMI IS NOT AN ACCURATE 
TOOL FOR IDENTIFYING 
OBESITY-RELATED 
COMPLICATIONS
People with obesity 
experience weight bias 
and stigma
Psychological
•  Cognitive approach 
 to behaviour change
•  Manage sleep, 
 time and stress
•  Psychotherapy if  
 appropriate
Medications
•  For weight loss 
 and to help   
 maintain weight 
 loss 
Bariatric 
surgery
•  Surgeon–patient  
 discussion
 ADVISE ON 
 MANAGEMENT
Medical nutrition therapy
•  Personalized counselling by a registered 
 dietitian with a focus on healthy food choices  
 and evidence-based nutrition therapy
Exercise
•  30-60 min of moderate to vigorous activity   
 most days 
3
THE PATIENT JOURNEY IN OBESITY MANAGEMENT
increased complications 
and mortality independent 
of weight or BMI
ASSESS THEIR STORY 
•  Goals that matter to the patient
•  Obesity classification 
 (BMI and waist circumference)
•  Disease severity 
 (Edmonton Obesity Staging System)
2
Treating the root 
causes of weight gain 
is the foundation of 
obesity management
Focus on 
patient-centred 
health outcomes
versus 
weight loss alone
4M
Social milieuMental
MetabolicMechanical
 Obesity  complex disease in which abnormal or excess 
body fat impairs health
Effects: 
 Weight bias  thinking that people with 
obesity do not have enough willpower 
or are not cooperative 
 Stigma  acting 
on weight-biased 
beliefs
Obesity-visual-nologos-print-E.pdf   1   2020-07-23   12:21 PM
GUIDELINE
E878 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
Recommendations
This clinical practice guideline informs the arc of the patient jour-
ney and clinical management approach in the primary care set-
ting. The guideline recommendations are shown in Table 1.
A complete description of the recommendations and support-
ing evidence are available in the 19 chapters of the full guideline 
(http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/). This synopsis outlines a dis-
cussion of the guiding principles that the executive committee 
determined as important for advancing clinical practice in Canada.
There are 5 steps in the patient arc to guide a health care pro-
vider in the care of people living with obesity. Each step is out-
lined below with highlights of the relevant recommendations 
and a discussion of supporting evidence.
1.  Recognition of obesity as a chronic disease by health care 
providers, who should ask the patient permission to offer 
advice and help treat this disease in an unbiased manner.
2.  Assessment of an individual living with obesity, using appro-
priate measurements, and identifying the root causes, com-
plications and barriers to obesity treatment.
3.  Discussion of the core treatment options (medical nutrition 
therapy and physical activity) and adjunctive therapies that 
may be required, including psychological, pharmacologic and 
surgical interventions.
4.  Agreement with the person living with obesity regarding goals 
of therapy, focusing mainly on the value that the person 
derives from health-based interventions.
5.  Engagement by health care providers with the person with 
obesity in continued follow-up and reassessments, and encour-
agement of advocacy to improve care for this chronic disease.
Step 1: Recognition of obesity as a chronic disease and 
obtaining patient permission
Primary care providers should recognize and treat obesity as a 
chronic disease, caused by abnormal or excess body fat accumu-
lation (adiposity), which impairs health, with increased risk of 
premature morbidity and mortality.1,2,18,44–47
Obesity is a complex and heterogeneous chronic disease that 
does not present in the same way in all patients and that 
requires individualized treatment and long-term support like any 
other complex chronic disease.
Weight bias in health care settings can reduce the quality of care 
for patients living with obesity. 42 A key to reducing weight bias, 
stigma and discrimination in health care settings is for health care 
providers to be aware of their own attitudes and behaviours toward 
individuals living with obesity.48 This can be achieved by complet-
ing a self-assessment tool, like the Implicit Association Test, for 
weight bias.49 A full description and supporting evidence for weight 
bias recommendations are available online (http://obesitycanada .
ca/guidelines/) in the chapter titled “Reducing weight bias in obes-
ity management, practice and policy.” 
Health care providers should not assume that all patients liv-
ing with obesity are prepared to initiate obesity management. 
Health care providers should ask the patient permission to dis-
cuss obesity, and if the patient permits, then a discussion on 
treatment can begin.50,51
Step 2: Assessment
Primary care clinicians should promote a holistic approach to 
health with a focus on health behaviours in all patients and 
address the root causes of weight gain with care to avoid stigma-
tizing and overly simplistic narratives.
Direct measurement of height, weight and waist circumfer-
ence and calculation of BMI should be included in routine phys-
ical examination for all adults. Although BMI has its limitations, it 
remains a valuable tool for screening purposes and for popula -
tion health indices. 52 For persons with increased BMI (between 
25 mg/m 2 and 34.9 mg/m 2), waist circumference should be regu-
larly measured to identify individuals with increased visceral adi-
posity and adiposity-related health risks.53
Root causes of obesity include biological factors such as 
genetics, epigenetics, neurohormonal mechanisms, associated 
chronic diseases and obesogenic medications, sociocultural 
practices and beliefs, social determinants of health, built 
en vironment, individual life experiences like adverse childhood 
experiences, and psychological factors such as mood, anxiety, 
binge-eating disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
self-worth and identity. 50 Working with people to understand 
their context and culture, and integrate their root causes, allows 
for the development of personalized plans. These plans can be 
integrated into long-term therapeutic relationships with chronic 
disease follow-up of obesity and related comorbidities, including 
addressing the root causes of obesity such as existing conditions 
and obesogenic medications.
We recommend obtaining a comprehensive history to identify 
these root causes of weight gain, as well as physical, mental and 
psychosocial barriers. Physical examination, laboratory, 
diagnostic imaging and other investigations should be carried 
out based on clinical judgment. We also recommend measuring 
blood pressure in both arms and obtaining fasting glucose or gly-
cated hemoglobin values and a lipid panel to determine cardio-
metabolic risk, and when indicated, alanine aminotransferase to 
screen for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Step 3: Discussion of treatment options
Adults living with obesity should receive individualized care 
plans that address their root causes of obesity and that provide 
support for behavioural change (e.g., nutrition, physical activity) 
and adjunctive therapies, which may include psychological, 
pharmacologic and surgical interventions.
Nutrition and exercise
All individuals, regardless of body size or composition, would 
benefit from adopting a healthy, well-balanced eating pattern 
and engaging in regular physical activity. Aerobic activity (30–
60 min) on most days of the week can lead to a small amount of 
weight and fat loss, improvement in cardiometabolic param-
eters, and weight maintenance after weight loss.54
Weight loss and weight-loss maintenance require a long-term 
reduction in caloric intake. Long-term adherence to a healthy 
eating pattern that is personalized to meet individual values and 
preferences, while fulfilling nutritional needs and treatment 
goals, is an important element of managing health and weight.
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E879
Medical nutrition therapy is a foundation for chronic disease 
management, including obesity management.55,56 However, med-
ical nutrition therapy should not be used in isolation in obesity 
management, as sustaining weight loss may be difficult long 
term because of compensatory mechanisms in the brain that 
promote positive caloric intake by increasing hunger and ulti -
mately causing weight gain. 57,58 Instead, medical nutrition ther -
apy, in combination with other interventions (psychological, 
pharmacologic, surgical), should be tailored to meet an individ-
ual’s health-related or weight-related outcomes.56,59
The weight loss achieved with health behavioural changes is 
usually 3%–5% of body weight, which can result in meaningful 
improvement in obesity-related comorbidities. 60 The amount of 
weight loss varies substantially among individuals, depending 
on biological and psychosocial factors and not simply on indi-
vidual effort.
Table 1 (part 1 of 5): Recommendations on management of obesity in adults* 
Recommendations
Category of evidence 
and strength of 
recommendation†
Reducing weight bias in obesity management, practice and policy 
1 Health care providers should assess their own attitudes and beliefs regarding obesity and consider how their attitudes 
and beliefs may influence care delivery.
Level 1a, grade A
2 Health care providers may recognize that internalized weight bias (bias toward oneself) in people living with obesity 
can affect behavioural and health outcomes.
Level 2a, grade B
3 Health care providers should avoid using judgmental words (level 1a, grade A), images (level 2b, grade B) and practices 
(level 2a, grade B) when working with patients living with obesity.
See recommendation
4 We recommend that health care providers avoid making assumptions that an ailment or complaint a patient presents 
with is related to their body weight.
Level 3, grade C
Epidemiology of adult obesity
5 Health care providers can recognize and treat obesity as a chronic disease, caused by abnormal or excess body fat 
accumulation (adiposity), which impairs health, with increased risk of premature morbidity and mortality.
Level 2b, grade B
6 The development of evidence-informed strategies at the health system and policy levels can be directed at managing 
obesity in adults.
Level 2b, grade B
7 Continued longitudinal national and regional surveillance of obesity that includes self-reported and measured data 
(i.e., height, weight, waist circumference) may be collected on a regular basis.
Level 2b, grade B
Enabling participation in activities of daily living for people living with obesity
8 We recommend that health care providers ask people living with obesity if they have concerns about managing self-care 
activities, such as bathing, getting dressed, bowel and bladder management, skin and wound care, and foot care.
Level 3, grade C
9 We recommend that health care providers assess fall risk in people living with obesity, as this could interfere with their 
ability and interest in participating in physical activity.
Level 3, grade C
Assessment of people living with obesity
10 We suggest that health care providers involved in screening, assessing and managing people living with obesity use the 
5As framework (see Appendix 2‡) to initiate the discussion by asking for their permission and assessing their readiness to 
begin treatment.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
11 Health care providers can measure height, weight and calculate the BMI in all adults (level 2a, grade B), and measure 
waist circumference in individuals with a BMI 25–35 kg/m2 (level 2b, grade B).
See recommendation
12 We suggest that a comprehensive history to identify root causes of weight gain as well as complications of obesity and 
potential barriers to treatment be included in the assessment.
Level 4, grade D
13 We recommend measuring blood pressure in both arms, fasting glucose or glycated hemoglobin and lipid profile to 
determine cardiometabolic risk and, where appropriate, AL T to screen for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in people 
living with obesity.
Level 3, grade D
14 We suggest that health care providers consider using the Edmonton Obesity Staging System (see Appendix 1)§ to 
determine the severity of obesity and guide clinical decision-making.
Level 4, grade D
The role of mental health in obesity management
15 We recommend regular monitoring of weight, glucose and lipid profile in people with a mental health diagnosis and 
who are taking medications associated with weight gain.
Level 3, grade C
16 Health care providers may consider both efficacy and effects on body weight when choosing psychiatric medications. Level 2a, grade B
17 Metformin and psychological treatment such as cognitive behavioural therapy should be considered for prevention of weight 
gain in people with severe mental illness who are treated with antipsychotic medications associated with weight gain.
Level 1a, grade A
18 Health care providers should consider lisdexamfetamine and topiramate as an adjunct to psychological treatment to 
reduce eating pathology and weight in people with overweight or obesity and binge-eating disorder.
Level 1a, grade A
GUIDELINE
E880 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
Table 1 (part 2 of 5): Recommendations on management of obesity in adults* 
Recommendations
Category of evidence 
and strength of 
recommendation†
Medical nutrition therapy in obesity management
19 We suggest that nutrition recommendations for adults of all body sizes be personalized to meet individual values, 
preferences and treatment goals to support a dietary approach that is safe, effective, nutritionally adequate, culturally 
acceptable and affordable for long-term adherence.
Level 4, grade D
20 Adults living with obesity should receive individualized medical nutrition therapy provided by a registered dietitian 
(when available) to improve weight outcomes (body weight, BMI), waist circumference, glycemic control, established 
lipid, and blood pressure targets. 
Level 1a, grade A
21 Adults living with obesity and impaired glucose tolerance (prediabetes) or type 2 diabetes may receive medical 
nutrition therapy provided by a registered dietitian (when available) to reduce body weight and waist circumference 
and improve glycemic control and blood pressure.
Level 2a, grade B
22 Adults living with obesity can consider any of multiple medical nutrition therapies to improve health-related outcomes, choosing 
the dietary patterns and food-based approaches that support their best long-term adherence. (Full recommendation and 
category and level of evidence available in the chapter titled “Medical nutrition therapy in obesity management. ”)
See recommendation
23 Adults living with obesity and impaired glucose tolerance (prediabetes) should consider intensive behavioural interventions 
that target a 5%–7% weight loss, to improve glycemic control, blood pressure and blood lipid targets (level 1a, grade A) and 
reduce the incidence of type 2 diabetes (level 1a, grade A), microvascular complications (retinopathy, nephropathy and 
neuropathy) (level 1a, grade B), and cardiovascular and all-cause mortality (level 1a, grade B).
See recommendation
24 Adults living with obesity and type 2 diabetes should consider intensive lifestyle interventions that target a 7%–15% 
weight loss, to increase the remission of type 2 diabetes and reduce the incidence of nephropathy, obstructive sleep 
apnea and depression.
Level 1a, grade A
25 We recommend a nondieting approach to improve quality of life, psychological outcomes (general well-being, body image 
perceptions), cardiovascular outcomes, body weight, physical activity, cognitive restraint and eating behaviours.
Level 3, grade C
Physical activity in obesity management
26 Aerobic physical activity (30–60 minutes of moderate to vigorous intensity most days of the week) can be considered for 
adults who want to:
• Achieve small amounts of body weight and fat loss (level 2a, grade B)
• Achieve reduction in abdominal visceral fat (level 1a, grade A) and ectopic fat, such as liver and heart fat (level 1a, grade A), 
even in the absence of weight loss
• Favour weight maintenance after weight loss (level 2a, grade B)
• Favour the maintenance of fat-free mass during weight loss (level 2a, grade B)
• Increase cardiorespiratory fitness (level 2a, grade B) and mobility (level 2a, grade B).
See recommendation
27 For adults living with overweight or obesity, resistance training may promote weight maintenance or modest increases 
in muscle mass or fat-free mass and mobility.
Level 2a, grade B
28 Increasing exercise intensity, including high-intensity interval training, can achieve greater increases in cardiorespiratory fitness 
and reduce the amount of time required to achieve benefits similar to those from moderate-intensity aerobic activity.
Level 2a, grade B
29 Regular physical activity, with and without weight loss, can improve many cardiometabolic risk factors in adults who 
have overweight or obesity, including hyperglycemia and insulin sensitivity (level 2b, grade B), high blood pressure 
(level 1a, grade B) and dyslipidemia (level 2a, grade B).
See recommendation
30 Regular physical activity can improve health-related quality of life, mood disorders (i.e., depression, anxiety) and body 
image in adults living with overweight or obesity.
Level 2b, grade B
Effective psychological and behavioural interventions in obesity management
31 Multicomponent psychological interventions (combining behaviour modification [goal-setting, self-monitoring, 
problem-solving], cognitive therapy [reframing] and values-based strategies to alter diet and activity) should be 
incorporated into care plans for weight loss, and improved health status and quality of life (level 1a, grade A) in a manner 
that promotes adherence, confidence and intrinsic motivation (level 1b, grade A).
See recommendation
32 Health care providers should provide longitudinal care with consistent messaging to people living with obesity in order to 
support the development of confidence in overcoming barriers (self-efficacy) and intrinsic motivation (personal, meaningful 
reasons to change), to encourage the patient to set and sequence health goals that are realistic and achievable, to 
self-monitor behaviour and to analyze setbacks using problem-solving and adaptive thinking (cognitive reframing), 
including clarifying and reflecting on values-based behaviours.
Level 1a, grade A
33 Health care providers should ask people living with obesity for permission to educate them that success in obesity 
management is related to improved health, function and quality of life resulting from achievable behavioural goals and 
not on the amount of weight loss. 
Level 1a, grade A
34 Health care providers should provide follow-up sessions consistent with repetition and relevance to support the 
development of self-efficacy and intrinsic motivation. (Full recommendation is available in the chapter titled “Effective 
psychological and behavioural interventions in obesity management. ”)
Level 1a, grade A
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E881
Table 1 (part 3 of 5): Recommendations on management of obesity in adults* 
Recommendations
Category of evidence 
and strength of 
recommendation†
Pharmacotherapy in obesity management
35 Pharmacotherapy for weight loss can be used for persons with BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2 or BMI ≥ 27 kg/m 2 with adiposity-related 
complications, in conjunction with medical nutrition therapy, physical activity and psychological interventions 
(liraglutide 3.0 mg, naltrexone-bupropion combination, orlistat).
Level 2a, grade B
36 Pharmacotherapy may be used to maintain weight loss that has been achieved by health behaviour changes, and to 
prevent weight regain (liraglutide 3.0 mg or orlistat).
Level 2a, grade B
37 For people living with type 2 diabetes and a BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2, pharmacotherapy can be used in conjunction with health 
behaviour changes for weight loss and improvement in glycemic control: liraglutide 3.0 mg (level 1a, grade A), 
naltrexone-bupropion combination (level 2a, grade B), orlistat (level 2a, grade B).
See recommendation
38 We recommend pharmacotherapy in conjunction with health behaviour changes for people living with prediabetes and 
overweight or obesity (BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2) to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes (liraglutide 3.0 mg; orlistat).
Level 2a, grade B
39 We do not suggest the use of prescription or over-the-counter medications other than those approved for weight management.Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
40 For people living with overweight or obesity who require pharmacotherapy for other health conditions, we suggest 
choosing drugs that are not associated with weight gain.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
Bariatric surgery: selection and preoperative workup
41 We suggest that a comprehensive medical and nutritional evaluation be completed and nutrient deficiencies corrected 
in candidates for bariatric surgery.
Level 4, grade D
42 Preoperative smoking cessation can minimize perioperative and postoperative complications. Level 2a, grade B
43 We suggest screening for and treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in people seeking bariatric surgery. Level 4, grade D
Bariatric surgery: surgical options and outcomes
44 Bariatric surgery can be considered for people with BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2 or BMI ≥ 35 kg/m 2 with at least 1 adiposity-related 
disease (level 4, grade D, consensus) to:
• Reduce long-term overall mortality (level 2b, grade B) 
• Induce significantly better long-term weight loss compared with medical management alone (level 1a, grade A)
• Induce control and remission of type 2 diabetes, in combination with best medical management, over best medical 
management alone (level 2a, grade B) 
• Significantly improve quality of life (level 3, grade C)
• Induce long-term remission of most adiposity-related diseases, including dyslipidemia (level 3, grade C), hypertension 
(level 3, grade C), liver steatosis and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (level 3, grade C).
See recommendation
45 Bariatric surgery should be considered in patients with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes and class I obesity (BMI 
between 30 and 35 kg/m2) despite optimal medical management.
Level 1a, grade A
46 Bariatric surgery may be considered for weight loss and/or to control adiposity-related diseases in persons with class 1 
obesity, in whom optimal medical and behavioural management has been insufficient to produce significant weight loss.
Level 2a, grade B
47 We suggest that the choice of bariatric procedure (sleeve gastrectomy, gastric bypass or duodenal switch) be decided 
according to the patient’s need, in collaboration with an experienced interprofessional team.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
48 We suggest that adjustable gastric banding not be offered owing to unacceptable complications and long-term failure. Level 4, grade D
49 We suggest that single anastomosis gastric bypass not be routinely offered, owing to long-term complications in 
comparison with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
Level 4, grade D
Bariatric surgery: postoperative management
50 Health care providers can encourage persons who have undergone bariatric surgery to participate in and maximize 
their access to behavioural interventions and allied health services at a bariatric surgical centre.
Level 2a, grade B
51 We suggest that bariatric surgical centres communicate a comprehensive care plan to primary care providers for patients 
who are discharged, including bariatric procedure, emergency contact numbers, annual blood tests required, long-term 
vitamin and minerals supplements, medications and behavioural interventions, as well as when to refer back.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
52 We suggest that after a patient has been discharged from the bariatric surgical centre, primary care providers conduct 
annual review of the following: weight, nutritional intake, activity, adherence to multivitamin and mineral supplements, 
assessment of comorbidities and laboratory tests to assess and treat for nutritional deficiencies as required.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
53 We suggest that primary care providers consider referral back to the bariatric surgical centre or to a local specialist for 
technical or gastrointestinal symptoms, nutritional issues, pregnancy, psychological support, weight regain or other 
medical issues related to bariatric surgery, as described in the chapter titled “Bariatric surgery: postoperative management.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
54 We suggest that bariatric surgical centres provide follow-up and appropriate laboratory tests at regular intervals 
postsurgery with access to appropriate health care professionals (dietitian, nurse, social worker, bariatric physician, 
surgeon, psychologist or psychiatrist) until discharge is deemed appropriate for the patient.
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
GUIDELINE
E882 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
Table 1 (part 4 of 5: Recommendations on management of obesity in adults* 
Recommendations
Category of evidence 
and strength of 
recommendation†
Primary care and primary health care in obesity management
55 We recommend that primary care clinicians identify people with overweight and obesity, and initiate patient-centred, 
health-focused conversations with them.
Level 3, grade C
56 We recommend that health care providers ensure they ask people for their permission before discussing weight or 
taking anthropometric measurements.
Level 3, grade C
57 Primary care interventions should be used to increase health literacy in individuals’ knowledge and skill about weight 
management as an effective intervention to manage weight.
Level 1a, grade A
58 Primary care clinicians should refer persons with overweight or obesity to primary care multicomponent programs 
with personalized obesity management strategies as an effective way to support obesity management.
Level 1b, grade B
59 Primary care clinicians can use collaborative deliberation with motivational interviewing to tailor action plans to 
individuals’ life context in a way that is manageable and sustainable to support improved physical and emotional 
health, and weight management.
Level 2b, grade C
60 Interventions that target a specific ethnic group should consider the diversity of psychological and social practices 
with regard to excess weight, food and physical activity, as well as socioeconomic circumstances, as they may differ 
across and within different ethnic groups.
Level 1b, grade B
61 Longitudinal primary care interventions should focus on incremental, personalized, small behaviour changes (the 
“small change approach”) to be effective in supporting people to manage their weight.
Level 1b, grade B
62 Primary care multicomponent programs should consider personalized obesity management strategies as an effective 
way to support people living with obesity.
Level 1b, grade B
63 Primary care interventions that are behaviour based (nutrition, exercise, lifestyle), alone or in combination with 
pharmacotherapy, should be used to manage overweight and obesity.
Level 1a, grade A
64 Group-based diet and physical activity sessions informed by the Diabetes Prevention Program and the Look AHEAD 
(Action for Health in Diabetes) programs should be used as an effective management option for adults with 
overweight and obesity.
Level 1b, grade A
65 Interventions that use technology to increase reach to larger numbers of people asynchronously should be a 
potentially viable lower cost intervention in a community-based setting.
Level 1b, grade B
66 Educators of undergraduate, graduate and continuing education programs for primary health care professionals 
should provide courses and clinical experiences to address the gaps in skills, knowledge of the evidence, and attitudes 
necessary to confidently and effectively support people living with obesity.
Level 1a, grade A
Commercial products and programs in obesity management
67 For adults living with overweight or obesity, the following commercial programs should achieve mild to moderate 
weight loss in the short or medium term, compared with usual care or education:
• WW (formerly Weight Watchers) (level 1a, grade A)
• Optifast (level 1b, grade B)
• Jenny Craig (level 1b, grade B)
• Nutrisystem (level 1b, grade B)
See recommendation
68 Optifast, Jenny Craig, WW (formerly Weight Watchers) and Nutrisystem should achieve a mild reduction of glycated 
hemoglobin values over a short-term period compared with usual counselling in adults with obesity and type 2 
diabetes.
Level 1b, grade B
69 We do not recommend the use of over-the-counter commercial weight-loss products for obesity management, owing 
to lack of evidence.
Level 4, grade D
70 We do not suggest that commercial weight-loss programs be used for improvement in blood pressure and lipid control 
in adults living with obesity. 
Level 4, grade D
Emerging technologies and virtual medicine in obesity management
71 Implementation of management strategies can be delivered through Web-based platforms (e.g., online education on 
medical nutrition therapy and physical activity) or mobile devices (e.g., daily weight reporting through a smartphone 
application) in the management of obesity.
Level 2a, grade B
72 We suggest that health care providers incorporate individualized feedback and follow-up (e.g., personalized 
coaching or feedback via phone or email) into technology-based management strategies to improve weight-loss 
outcomes.
Level 4, grade D
73 The use of wearable activity tracking technology should be part of a comprehensive strategy for weight 
management.
Level 1a, grade A
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E883
Table 1 (part 5 of 5): Recommendations on management of obesity in adults* 
Recommendations
Category of evidence 
and strength of 
recommendation†
Weight management over the reproductive years for adult women living with obesity
74 We recommend that primary care providers discuss weight-management targets specific to the reproductive years 
with adult women with obesity: preconception weight loss (level 3, grade C); gestational weight gain of 5 kg to 9 kg 
over the entire pregnancy (level 4, grade D); postpartum weight loss of — at minimum — gestational weight gain (level 
3, grade C) to reduce the risk of adverse outcomes in the current or in a future pregnancy.
See recommendation
75 Primary care providers should offer behaviour change interventions including both nutrition and physical activity to 
adult women with obesity who are considering a pregnancy (level 3, grade C), who are pregnant (level 2a, grade B) 
and who are postpartum (level 1a, grade A) in order to achieve weight targets.
See recommendation
76 We recommend that primary care providers encourage and support pregnant women with obesity to consume foods 
consistent with a healthy dietary pattern in order to meet their target gestational weight gain.
Level 3, grade C
77 We recommend that primary care providers encourage and support pregnant women with obesity who do not have 
contraindications to exercise during pregnancy  to engage in at least 150 minutes per week of moderate intensity 
physical activity, to assist in the management of gestational weight gain.
Level 3, grade C
78 Health care providers should not prescribe metformin for gestational weight gain in pregnant women with obesity 
(level 1b, grade A). We suggest that weight-management medications not be used during pregnancy or breastfeeding 
(level 4, grade D).
See recommendation
79 We recommend that women with obesity be offered additional breastfeeding support because of decreased rates of 
initiation and continuation.
Level 3, grade C
Obesity management and Indigenous Peoples
80 We suggest that health care providers for Indigenous people living with obesity:
• Engage with the patient’s social realities.
• Validate the patient’s experiences of stress and systemic disadvantage influencing poor health and obesity, 
exploring elements of their environment where reduced stress could shift behaviours.
• Advocate for access to obesity-management resources within publicly funded health care systems, recognizing that 
resources beyond may be unaffordable and unattainable for many.
• Help patients recognize that good health is attainable, and they are entitled to it.
• Negotiate small, attainable steps relevant to the patient’s context. 
• Address resistance, seeming apathy and paralysis in patients and providers.
• Self-reflect on anti-Indigenous sentiment common within health care systems, exploring patient motivations and 
mental health (e.g., trauma, grief) as alternative understandings of causes and solutions to their health problems. 
Explore one’s own potential for bias influenced by systemic racism.
• Expect patient mistrust in health systems; reposition themselves as a helper to the patient instead of as an expert, 
which may stir resistance and be a barrier to patients’ wellness.
• When resistance, seeming apathy and paralysis are encountered, explore patient mental and emotional health 
needs, which have unique drivers and presentations in many Indigenous contexts.
• Build complex knowledge by healing relationships.
• Build patient knowledge and capacity for obesity self-management through longitudinal explorations of co-
occurring health, social, environmental and cultural factors. Strive to build relationships that incorporate healing 
from multigenerational trauma that, owing to residential schools and child welfare system involvement, may more 
frequently include sexual abuse.
• Build their own knowledge regarding the health legacy of colonization — including ongoing experiences of 
anti-Indigenous discrimination within systems and wider society — to facilitate relationships built on mutual 
understanding.
• Ensure knowledge provided is congruent with the patient’s perspectives and educational level, and is learner 
centred, including potential for patient anticipation of racism or unequal treatment.
• Connect to behaviour, the body and Indigenous ways of knowing, doing and being.
• Elicit and incorporate the patient’s individual and community-based concepts of health and healthy behaviours in 
relation to body size, activity and food preferences (e.g., preference for or scarce access to land-based foods and 
activities).
• Deeply engage in learning of common values and principles regarding communication and knowledge-sharing in 
Indigenous contexts (e.g., relationalism, noninterference).
Level 4, grade D 
(consensus)
Note: AL T = alanine aminotransferase, BMI = body mass index.
*A complete description of the recommendations and supporting evidence is available at http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/. Table 3 provides definitions for the actionable verbs 
used in these recommendations. 
†For the classification scheme for category of evidence and strength of evidence, see Box 3.
‡Appendix 2 is available at www.cmaj.ca/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1503/cmaj.191707/-/DC2.
§See Appendix 1. 
GUIDELINE
E884 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
The weight at which the body stabilizes when engaging in 
healthy behaviours can be referred to as the “best weight”; this 
may not be an “ideal” weight on the BMI scale. Achieving an 
“ideal” BMI may be very difficult. If further weight loss is needed 
to improve health and well-being beyond what can be achieved 
with behavioural modification, then more intensive pharmaco-
logic and surgical therapeutic options can be considered.
Psychological and behavioural interventions
All health interventions such as healthy eating and physical activ-
ity strategies, medication adherence or surgery preparation and 
adjustment approaches rest on behaviour change. 61 Psycho-
logical and behavioural interventions are the “how to” of change. 
They empower the clinician to guide the patient toward recom-
mended behaviours that can be sustained over time. 60 A full 
description of psychological and behavioural interventions and 
supporting evidence are available online (http://obesitycanada.
ca/guidelines/) in the chapter titled “Effective psychological and 
behavioural interventions in obesity management.”
Pharmacotherapy
We recommend adjunctive pharmacotherapy for weight loss 
and weight-loss maintenance for individuals with BMI ≥  30 kg/m2 
or BMI ≥  27 kg/m 2 with adiposity-related complications, to sup-
port medical nutrition therapy, physical activity and psycho-
logical interventions. Options include liraglutide 3.0 mg, 
 naltrexone-bupropion combination and orlistat. Pharmacother-
apy augments the magnitude of weight loss beyond that which 
health behaviour changes can achieve alone and is important in 
the prevention of weight regain. 62–66  A full description and sup-
porting evidence are available online (http://obesitycanada.ca  /
guidelines/) in the chapter titled “Pharmacotherapy in obesity 
management.” 
Bariatric surgery
Bariatric surgery may be considered for people with 
BMI  ≥ 40 kg/m 2 or BMI ≥  35 kg/m 2 with at least 1 obesity-related 
disease. The decision regarding the type of surgery should be 
made in collaboration with a multidisciplinary team, balancing 
the patient’s expectations, medical condition, and expected ben-
efits and risks of the surgery. A full description and supporting evi-
dence are available online (http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/) 
in the chapters titled “Bariatric surgery: selection and preopera-
tive workup,” “Bariatric surgery: options and outcomes” and 
“Bariatric surgery: postoperative management.”
Step 4: Agreement regarding goals of therapy
Because obesity is a chronic disease, managing it in the long 
term involves patient–provider collaboration. 67 Health care pro-
viders should talk with their patients and agree on realistic 
expectations, person-centred treatments and sustainable goals 
for behaviour change and health outcomes.68
Helpful actions in primary care consultations to mitigate anti-
fat stigma include explicitly acknowledging the multiple determi-
nants of weight-disrupting stereotypes of personal failure or suc-
cess attached to body composition; focusing on behavioural 
interventions to improve overall health; and redefining success 
as healthy behaviour change regardless of body size or weight.69
As this disease is chronic in nature, the treatment plan must 
be long term. Health care providers and patients should design 
and agree on a personalized action plan that is practical and sus-
tainable and addresses the drivers of weight gain.70
Step 5: Follow-up and advocacy
There is a need to advocate for more effective care for people liv-
ing with obesity. This includes improving the education and life-
long learning of health care providers to be able to deliver effec-
tive, evidence-based obesity care. We also need to support 
allocation of health care resources to improve access to effective 
behavioural, pharmacologic and surgical therapeutic options.
There are substantial barriers affecting access to obesity care 
in Canada, including a profound lack of interdisciplinary obesity 
management programs, a lack of adequate access to health care 
providers with expertise in obesity, long wait times for referrals 
and surgery, and the high costs of some treatments.,37,71–73 In gen-
eral, health care professionals are poorly prepared to treat obes-
ity.74 None of the anti-obesity medications available in Canada is 
listed as a benefit on any provincial or territorial formulary and 
none is covered under any provincial public drug benefit or phar-
macare program.71 Wait times for bariatric surgery in Canada are 
the longest of any surgically treatable condition. 37,71 Although 
access to bariatric surgery has increased in some parts of Canada, 
it is still limited in most provinces and nonexistent in the 3 terri-
tories.37,71,75 Patients referred to bariatric surgery can wait as long 
as 8 years before meeting a specialist or receiving the surgery.
The lack of access to obesity treatments is contributing to rising 
levels of severe obesity in Canada.46 Canadians affected by obesity 
are left to navigate a complex landscape of weight-loss products 
and services, many of which lack a scientific rationale and openly 
promote unrealistic and unsustainable weight-loss goals.76
Methods
Composition of participating groups
Obesity Canada and the Canadian Association of Bariatric Phys-
icians and Surgeons assembled an executive committee and 
steering committee with broad expertise and geographic repre-
sentation. The executive committee (comprising 2 co-chairs 
[S.W., D.C.W.L.], a primary care physician [D.C.-S.], a psychologist 
[M.V.], a bariatric surgeon [L.B.] and a nephrologist [A.M.S.]) pro-
vided overall vision and oversight for the guideline process.
The steering committee (n  = 16) consisted of some lead 
authors of each chapter and a person living with obesity; this 
committee identified additional researchers (chapter leads and 
authors) to write each chapter. The executive committee and 
steering committee met in person in April 2017 and December 
2017 and at least monthly by phone.
Chapter leads and chapter authors (n  = 60) were selected 
based on their expertise in clinical practice and research in the 
field of obesity medicine. The number of chapter authors per 
chapter ranged from 2 to 4. Some chapter leads identified addi-
tional authors to participate in writing each chapter.
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E885
We engaged people living with obesity (n = 7) through partici-
pation of the Public Engagement Committee of Obesity Canada. 
One member of the Public Engagement Committee (I.P.) was 
assigned to the steering committee for this guideline. The Public 
Engagement Committee met by phone once per month. We 
obtained contributions from committee members through 
online surveys, focus groups and individual conversations.
We engaged Indigenous community members through a 
focus group ( n = 14). Additionally, we obtained the insights of 
health care providers working with Indigenous communities via 
a consensus-building process between these clinicians and chap-
ter authors, carried out over the spring of 2019, which further 
grounded evidence in clinical practice. Details are available 
online (http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/) in the chapter titled 
“Obesity management with Indigenous Peoples.”
Obesity Canada staff, consultants and volunteers (n = 15) pro-
vided administrative support and project coordination for the 
guideline development process. Table 2 outlines the guideline 
development process and the responsibilities of each group of 
participants.
Selection of priority topics
The executive committee conducted a mind-mapping exercise to 
identify the scope of the guideline and the broad sections and 
chapters (April–June 2017). 79 A total of 19 different sections and 
chapters were prioritized. The steering committee developed PI/
PECOT (Population, Intervention or Exposure, Comparison, Out-
come, Time) questions for each chapter at an in-person meeting 
on Dec. 15–16, 2017, resulting in 179 questions to guide the 
literature search. All clinical questions were developed with the 
assistance of the McMaster Evidence Review and Synthesis Team 
(MERST; previously the McMaster Evidence-Based Practice Cen-
tre) in the appropriate format (e.g., PICO [T] for therapeutics and 
treatments, PEO for qualitative questions).
Literature review and quality assessment
The McMaster Evidence Review and Synthesis Team supported 
the guideline development through literature searches based 
on the PI/PECOT questions for each chapter. A health sciences 
librarian, based at McMaster Health Sciences Library (Hamil-
ton, Ont.), used this information to create search strategies for 
the MEDLINE and Embase databases. The searches were for 
peer-reviewed and published literature in the English lan-
guage; the search dates were January 2006 to June 2018. 
There were 14  searches that mapped directly to the chapters 
and another 7 searches that helped provide context for various 
chapters. Search strategies are available on the obesity guide-
line webpage (http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines/). Once a 
search was conducted, the results were uploaded to EndNote, 
where the duplicates were removed and the final set of cita-
tions was uploaded to DistillerSR software for selection and 
review. 80 In addition to the electronic searches, the chapter 
authors identified additional citations and added them to the 
main search results.
Two reviewers completed screening of article titles and 
abstracts and independently selected studies for possible inclu-
sion. Any citation that was selected for inclusion by either 
reviewer was moved to full-text review. One or more authors of 
Table 2: Summary of guideline development process
Activity Responsible group
• Mind-mapping exercise to identify the scope of the guideline and the broad sections and 
chapters (19 chapters)
Executive committee
• Develop research questions (PICO[T]) for each chapter Steering committee
• Conduct literature search77 MERST
• Load results of the literature search into the Distiller Systematic Review software program MERST
• Conduct critical appraisal of all papers77 Chapter leads
• Review results of critical appraisal and assign evidence grades to each paper using 
AGREE II tool 78
MERST
• Develop reports with graded evidence MERST
• Develop recommendations based on the highest level of evidence and expert consensus Steering Committee with chapter leads and authors 
• Review recommendations to ensure fidelity with the evidence (only for recommendations 
using grade A–C level evidence)
MERST
• Review recommendations to ensure fidelity with the evidence and relevance to primary 
care health care professionals
Executive committee
• Revise recommendations based on feedback from the executive committee and MERST Steering committee with chapter leads
• Review and approve final recommendations Executive committee
• External review of recommendations to assess relevance and feasibility Family physicians and people living with obesity
• External peer review of chapters Experts in each area
Note: AGREE = Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation, MERST = McMaster Evidence Review and Synthesis Team; PICO(T) = Population, Intervention, Comparison, 
Outcome, Time.
GUIDELINE
E886 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
the relevant chapter conducted reviews of full-text articles for 
relevancy. Selected citations were then assessed for their meth-
odological quality using the Shekelle approach. 77,81 Each citation 
was categorized into prevention, treatment, evaluation of diag-
nostic properties or prognosis. Once that selection was made, 
the appropriate methods worksheet was displayed in the 
Distiller SR platform, from which the methodological questions 
were answered and a level of evidence generated based on the 
type and quality of the study. The levels of evidence informed the 
strength of the recommendations and were generated from the 
methods worksheets (Box 3).77
Development of recommendations
Recommendations were formulated by the steering committee, 
chapter leads and chapter authors based on the highest level of 
evidence available (Box 3).77 Chapter leads and authors reviewed 
the type and strength of the available evidence (level) and added 
the study reference that provided the highest level of evidence 
for the specific recommendation.
Recognizing the importance of qualitative research in 
addressing questions pertinent to the care of people living with 
obesity, content experts in qualitative research (S.K., X.R.S., 
D.C.S., L.C., S.R.M.) were involved in the review of all materials 
informing these recommendations. Consensus appraisal of evi-
dence quality by reviewers with expertise in qualitative methods 
informed the level of evidence in these recommendations.
Some grade D recommendations were formulated based on 
expert committee reports, opinions or clinical experience of 
respected authorities, and referenced accordingly; other grade D 
recommendations formulated by chapter authors were noted 
with “Consensus” after the grade D.
Chapter authors used a standardized terminology to make 
the recommendation more specific. The actionable verbs used 
for each of the recommendations were informed by the literature 
(Table 3).82–84
We used an iterative process to finalize the recommenda-
tions. Methodologists from MERST provided an independent 
review of recommendations that had a grade between A and C, 
for which they examined the clarity of wording and the fidelity of 
the recommendations with the evidence. Two methodologists (a 
primary and secondary reviewer) reviewed each recommenda-
tion, using checklists as a guide for assigning levels of evidence 
to each citation. The methodologists met, discussed and reached 
consensus on grading the recommendations, and reported their 
suggestions regarding revisions to the wording or grading to the 
executive committee. Chapter leads edited the recommenda-
tions based on the MERST review process.
The executive committee voted on each recommendation, to 
ensure consensus. If a recommendation did not reach 100% 
agreement, the executive committee discussed the recommen-
dation in depth until consensus was achieved. The chapter leads 
subsequently modified the wording of this recommendation, as 
required, and the executive committee approved the newly 
worded recommendation. The executive committee provided 
final approval of all the recommendations. All the recommenda-
tions included in this guideline achieved 100% agreement.
External review
External reviewers (primary care health care professionals and 
people living with obesity [ n = 7]) reviewed the recommenda-
tions for relevance and feasibility. We made some modifica-
tions to reflect language and the context of the primary care 
setting. A separate external peer review was conducted for each 
chapter.
Management of competing interests
Funding came from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research  
Strategic Patient-Oriented Research initiative, Obesity Canada’s 
Fund for Obesity Collaboration and Unified Strategies (FOCUS)
initiative, the Canadian Association of Bariatric Physicians and 
Surgeons, and in-kind support from the scientific and profes-
sional volunteers engaged in the process. The views of the fund-
ing body have not influenced the content of the guideline. All 
committee members (executive and steering committees), chap-
ter leads and chapter authors were volunteers and not remuner-
ated for their services.
Table 3: Definitions of actionable verbs used in the 
recommendations82–84
Grade level Suggested terms
Level 1, grade A recommendations Use the term “should”
Level 2, grade B recommendations Use the terms “may” or “can”
Level 3, grade C recommendations Use the term “recommend”
Level 4, grade D and consensus 
recommendations
Use the term “suggest”
Box 3: Classification schemes77     
Category of evidence
• Level 1a: Evidence from meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs)
• Level 1b: Evidence from at least 1 RCT
• Level 2a: Evidence from at least 1 controlled study without 
randomization
• Level 3: Evidence from nonexperimental descriptive studies, 
such as comparative studies, correlation studies and case–
control studies
• Level 4: Evidence from expert committee reports or opinions or 
clinical experience of respected authorities, or both
Strength of recommendation
• Grade A: Directly based on level 1 evidence
• Grade B: Directly based on level 2 evidence or extrapolated 
recommendation from category 1 evidence
• Grade C: Directly based on level 3 evidence or extrapolated 
recommendation from level 1 or 2 evidence
• Grade D: Directly based on level 4 evidence or extrapolated 
recommendation from level 1, 2 or 3 evidence
Adapted with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Limited. Shekelle PG, Woolf 
SH, Eccles M, et al. Developing clinical guidelines. West J Med 1999;170:348-51.
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E887
The executive committee developed and managed the com-
peting interest policy and procedures for mitigating bias. The 
policy and disclosures of competing interest are available on the 
guideline website. All participants were required to disclose 
potential competing interests. We maintained detailed compet-
ing interest declarations throughout the process for all members 
of the steering and executive committees, as well as the partici-
pating methodologists from MERST. We used the International 
Committee of Medical Journal Editors’ disclosure form, with the 
addition of government funding sources.
Individuals with relevant disclosures were not excluded from 
conducting the critical appraisals or voting on recommenda-
tions. However, the executive committee asked individuals with 
direct competing interests to abstain from voting in the areas in 
which they had the conflict. Any discussion regarding off-label 
use of drugs included the caveat that the use was off label.
As mentioned earlier, methodologists from MERST who had no 
competing interests reviewed and graded78 each included study to 
ensure the evidence had been appropriately assessed. They also 
reviewed the recommendations (graded between A and C) to ensure 
that recommendations were aligned with the evidence. Finally, we 
conducted an external review process to assess the feasibility of the 
recommendations and evaluate for the presence of bias.
Implementation
Obesity Canada and the Canadian Association of Bariatric Sur-
geons and Physicians have created a joint guideline website 
(http://obesitycanada.ca/guidelines) that hosts the full guideline; 
interim updates; a quick reference guide; key messages; health 
care provider tools, slide kits, videos and webinars; and resources 
for people living with obesity and their support systems, in English 
and French. The guideline will be hosted on the website as a living 
document. Each chapter lead will monitor evidence related to this 
guideline and will collaborate with the executive committee to 
update the recommendations if new evidence becomes available 
that could influence the recommendations. A framework for 
implementation (5As Framework) is available in Appendix 2.
More than 10 years after the release of the first Canadian 
obes ity guideline in 2006, access to obesity care remains an issue 
in Canada.37,71 Obesity is not officially recognized as a chronic dis-
ease by the federal, provincial and territorial, and municipal gov-
ernments, despite declarations by the Canadian Medical Associa-
tion 85  and the World Health Organization. 86  The lack of 
recognition of obesity as a chronic disease by public and private 
payers, health systems, the public and media has a trickle-down 
effect on access to treatment. 72 Obesity continues to be treated 
as a self-inflicted condition, which affects the type of interven-
tions and approaches that are implemented by governments or 
covered by health benefit plans.87
Implementation of this guideline will require targeted policy 
action, as well as advocacy efforts and engagement from people 
living with obesity, their families and health care providers. 
Canadian organizations have come together to change the narra-
tive regarding obesity in Canada, to eliminate weight bias and 
obesity stigma, and to change the way health care systems and 
policies approach obesity. 88 This guideline will be used to assist 
in advocacy efforts to federal and provincial governments to 
improve the care of individuals with obesity.
Other guidelines
In 2006, the first evidence-based Canadian clinical practice guide-
line on the prevention and management of obesity in adults and 
children was released.43 In 2015, the Canadian Task Force on Pre-
ventive Health Care, in collaboration with scientific staff of the 
Public Health Agency of Canada and the McMaster Evidence 
Review and Synthesis Centre, released a set of recommendations 
for prevention of weight gain and use of behavioural and pharma-
cologic interventions to manage overweight and obesity in adults 
in primary care. 89 This guideline was not designed to “apply to 
people with BMI of 40 or greater, who may benefit from special -
ized bariatric programs” and reviewed only intervention trials 
conducted in settings generalizable to Canadian primary care. 
The guideline also did not include surgical treatments.
Gaps in knowledge
The recommendations in this guideline are informed by the best 
level of evidence available in 2020. We acknowledge that ongo-
ing research will continue to inform and advance obesity 
management.90,91
Current treatment options, apart from surgical intervention, 
rarely yield sustained weight loss beyond 20%, and for some 
people living with obesity, this level of weight loss may be inade-
quate for the resolution or improvement of many adiposity-
related medical complications. There is a need for more treat-
ment options to meet the needs of people with obesity. Weight 
regain continues to be a challenge for many patients who have 
received treatment.92
Conclusion
Obesity is a prevalent, complex chronic disease that affects a 
large number of adults in Canada and globally, and yet only a 
small fraction of people living with obesity who could benefit 
from treatment have access to care. This updated evidence-
informed guideline is an attempt to enhance access and care by 
people living with obesity through recognition among health care 
providers that obesity requires long-term treatment. The newer 
insights into appetite regulation and the pathophysiology of 
obesity have opened new avenues for treating this chronic 
disease. Reducing weight bias and stigma, understanding the root 
causes of obesity, and promoting and supporting patient-centred 
behavioural interventions and appropriate treatment by health 
care providers — preferably with the support of interdisciplinary 
care teams — will raise the standards of care and improve the 
well-being of people living with obesity. Dissemination and 
implementation of this guideline are integral components of our 
goals to address this prevalent chronic disease. Much more effort 
is needed to close the gaps in knowledge through obesity 
research, education, prevention and treatment.
GUIDELINE
E888 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
References
 1. Prospective Studies Collaboration; Whitlock G, Lewington S, Sherliker P, et al. 
Body-mass index and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 adults: collaborative 
analyses of 57 prospective studies. Lancet 2009;373:1083-96.
 2. Global BMI Mortality Collaboration; Di Angelantonio E, Bhupathiraju ShN, Wormser 
D, et al. Body-mass index and all-cause mortality: Individual-participant-data 
meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four continents. Lancet 2016;388: 
776-86.
 3. Abdullah A, Peeters A, de Courten M, et al. The magnitude of association 
between overweight and obesity and the risk of diabetes: a meta-analysis of 
prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;89:309-19.
 4. Aune D, Norat T, Vatten LJ. Body mass index, abdominal fatness and the risk of 
gallbladder disease. Eur J Epidemiol 2015;30:1009-19.
 5. Longo M, Zatterale F, Naderi J, et al. Adipose tissue dysfunction as determi-
nant of obesity-associated metabolic complications.  Int J Mol Sci 2019;20: 
E2358.
 6. Aune D, Norat T, Vatten LJ. Body mass index and the risk of gout: A systematic 
review and dose–response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Nutr  
2014;53:1591-601.
 7. Fontaine KR, Redden DT, Wang C, et al. Years of life lost due to obesity. JAMA 
2003;289:187-93.
 8. Grover SA, Kaouache M, Rempel P, et al. Years of life lost and healthy life-years 
lost from diabetes and cardiovascular disease in overweight and obese people: 
a modelling study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;3:114-22.
 9. Wolin KY, Carson K, Colditz GA. Obesity and cancer. Oncologist 2010;15:556-65.
10. Ackerman SE, Blackburn OA, Marchildon F, et al. Insights into the link between 
obesity and cancer. Curr Obes Rep 2017;6:195-203.
11. Sharma AM. M, M, M & M: a mnemonic for assessing obesity. Obes Rev 2010;11: 
808-9.
12. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in body-mass 
index, underweight, overweight, and obesity from 1975 to 2016: a pooled 
analy sis of 2416 population-based measurement studies in 128·9 million chil-
dren, adolescents, and adults. Lancet 2017;390:2627-42.
13. Obesity in Canada — Snapshot. Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada; 2009. 
Available: www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/reports-publications/
obesity-canada-snapshot.html (accessed 2020 May 22).
14. Obesity in Canada — Health and economic implications. Ottawa: Public 
Health Agency of Canada; modified 2011 June 23. Available: www.canada.ca/en 
/public -health /services/health-promotion/healthy-living/obesity-canada/health 
-economic -implications.html (accessed 2020 May 22).
15. Anis AH, Zhang W, Bansback N, et al. Obesity and overweight in Canada: an 
updated cost-of-illness study. Obes Rev 2010;11:31-40.
16. Guh DP, Zhang W, Bansback N, et al. The incidence of co-morbidities related to 
obesity and overweight: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public 
Health 2009;9:88.
17. Sutin AR, Stephan Y, Terracciano A. Weight discrimination and risk of mortality. 
Psychol Sci 2015;26:1803-11.
18. Mechanick JI, Hurley DL, Garvey WT. Adiposity-based chronic disease as a new 
diagnostic term: the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and 
American College Of Endocrinology position statement. Endocr Pract 2017;23: 
372-8.
19. Garvey WT, Mechanick JI. Proposal for a scientifically correct and medically 
actionable disease classification system (ICD) for obesity. Obesity (Silver Spring) 
2020;28:484-92.
20. Cedernaes J, Huang W, Ramsey KM, et al. Transcriptional basis for rhythmic 
control of hunger and metabolism within the AgRP neuron. Cell Metab 2019;29: 
1078-91.e5.
21. Fasshauer M, Blüher M. Adipokines in health and disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
2015;36:461-70.
22. Secher A, Jelsing J, Baquero AF, et al. The arcuate nucleus mediates GLP-1 
receptor agonist liraglutide-dependent weight loss. J Clin Invest 2014;124: 
4473-88.
23. Sternson SM, Eiselt A-K. Three pillars for the neural control of appetite. Annu 
Rev Physiol 2017;79:401-23.
24. Hill JO. Understanding and addressing the epidemic of obesity: an energy balance 
perspective. Endocr Rev 2006;27:750-61.
25. Mebel DM, Wong JC, Dong YJ, et al. Insulin in the ventral tegmental area reduces 
hedonic feeding and suppresses dopamine concentration via increased reuptake. 
Eur J Neurosci 2012;36:2336-46.
26. Bliss ES, Whiteside E. The gut-brain axis, the human gut microbiota and their 
integration in the development of obesity. Front Physiol 2018;9:900.
27. van Bloemendaal L, Veltman DJ, Ten Kulve JS, et al. Brain reward-system activa-
tion in response to anticipation and consumption of palatable food is altered by 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor activation in humans. Diabetes Obes Metab  
2015;17:878-86.
28. Sharma AM, Kushner RF. A proposed clinical staging system for obesity. Int J 
Obes (Lond) 2009;33:289-95.
29. Grundy SM, Neeland IJ, Turer AT, et al.  Waist circumference as measure of 
abdominal fat compartments. J Obes 2013;2013:454285.
30. Ross R, Neeland IJ, Yamashita S, et al. Waist circumference as a vital sign in 
clinical practice: a Consensus Statement from the IAS and ICCR Working Group 
on Visceral Obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2020;16:177-89.
31. Neeland IJ, Ross R, Després J-P, et al. ; International Atherosclerosis Society ; 
International Chair on Cardiometabolic Risk Working Group on Visceral Obesity. 
Visceral and ectopic fat, atherosclerosis, and cardiometabolic disease: a position 
statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:715-25.
32. Hruby A, Hu FB. The epidemiology of obesity: a big picture. Pharmacoeconomics 
2015;33:673-89.
33. Padwal RS, Pajewski NM, Allison DB, et al. Using the Edmonton obesity staging 
system to predict mortality in a population-representative cohort of people 
with overweight and obesity. CMAJ 2011;183:E1059-66.
34. Canning KL, Brown RE, Wharton S, et al. Edmonton Obesity Staging System 
prevalence and association with weight loss in a publicly funded referral-
based obesity clinic. J Obes 2015;2015:619734.
35. Kuk JL, Ardern CI, Church TS, et al. Edmonton Obesity Staging System: associ-
ation with weight history and mortality risk. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2011;36: 
570-6.
36. Ogunleye A, Osunlana A, Asselin J, et al.  The 5As team intervention: bridging 
the knowledge gap in obesity management among primary care practitioners 
[published erratum in BMC Res Notes 2016;9:164]. BMC Res Notes 2015;8:810.
37. Report card on access to obesity treatment for adults in Canada 2017. Edmonton: 
Obesity Canada; 2017.
38. Block JP, DeSalvo KB, Fisher WP. Are physicians equipped to address the obesity 
epidemic? Knowledge and attitudes of internal medicine residents. Prev Med  
2003;36:669-75.
39. Janke EA, Ramirez ML, Haltzman B, et al. Patient’s experience with comorbidity 
management in primary care: a qualitative study of comorbid pain and obesity. 
Prim Health Care Res Dev 2016;17:33-41.
40. Greener J, Douglas F, van Teijlingen E. More of the same? Conflicting perspectives 
of obesity causation and intervention amongst overweight people, health profes-
sionals and policy makers. Soc Sci Med 2010;70:1042-9.
41. Kirk SFL, Price SL, Penney TL, et al. Blame, shame, and lack of support: a multi-
level study on obesity management. Qual Health Res 2014;24:790-800.
42. Alberga AS, Edache IY, Forhan M, et al. Weight bias and health care utilization: a scop-
ing review. Prim Health Care Res Dev 2019;20:e116. doi: 10.1017/S1463423619000227.
43. Lau DCW, Douketis JD, Morrison KM, et al.; Obesity Canada Clinical Practice 
Guidelines Expert Panel. 2006 Canadian clinical practice guidelines on the 
management and prevention of obesity in adults and children [summary].  
CMAJ 2007;176(Suppl):S1-13.
44. Obesity and overweight. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. Available: 
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight (accessed 
2020 May 22).
45. Table 13-10-0096-20: Body mass index, overweight or obese, self-reported, 
adult, age groups (18 years and older). Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E889
46. Twells LK, Gregory DM, Reddigan J, et al. Current and predicted prevalence of 
obesity in Canada: a trend analysis. CMAJ Open 2014;2:E18-26.
47. Hall KD, Heymsfield SB, Kemnitz JW, et al. Energy balance and its components: 
implications for body weight regulation. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:989-94.
48. Lee M, Ata RN, Brannick MT. Malleability of weight-biased attitudes and beliefs: a 
meta-analysis of weight bias reduction interventions. Body Image 2014;11:251-9.
49. Project Implicit. 2011. Available: https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/ (accessed 
2020 May 22).
50. Luig T, Anderson R, Sharma AM, et al. Personalizing obesity assessment and 
care planning in primary care: patient experience and health outcomes in 
everyday life and health. Clin Obes 2018;8:411-23.
51. Vallis M, Piccinini-Vallis H, Sharma AM, et al. Clinical review: modified 5 As: minimal 
intervention for obesity counseling in primary care. Can Fam Physician  2013; 
59:27-31.
52. Sharma AM, Campbell-Scherer  D. Redefining obesity: beyond the numbers.  
Obesity (Silver Spring) 2017;25:660-1.
53. Camhi SM, Bray GA, Bouchard C, et al. The relationship of waist circumference 
and BMI to visceral, subcutaneous, and total body fat: sex and race differences. 
Obesity (Silver Spring) 2011;19:402-8.
54. Mabire L, Mani R, Liu L, et al. The influence of age, sex and body mass index on the 
effectiveness of brisk walking for obesity management in adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Phys Act Health 2017;14:389-407.
55. Raynor HA, Davidson PG, Burns H, et al. Medical nutrition therapy and weight 
loss questions for the evidence analysis library prevention of type 2 diabetes 
project: systematic reviews. J Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:1578-611.
56. Raynor HA, Champagne CM. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: 
interventions for the treatment of overweight and obesity in adults. J Acad Nutr 
Diet 2016;116:129-47.
57. Sumithran  P, Prendergast  LA, Delbridge  E, et al.  Long-term persistence of 
hormonal adaptations to weight loss. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1597-604.
58. Rosenbaum M, Hirsch J, Gallagher DA, et al. Long-term persistence of adaptive 
thermogenesis in subjects who have maintained a reduced body weight. Am J 
Clin Nutr 2008;88:906-12.
59. Koliaki C, Spinos T, Spinou M, et al. Defining the optimal dietary approach for 
safe, effective and sustainable weight loss in overweight and obese adults.  
Healthcare (Basel) 2018;6:E73.
60. Look AHEAD Research Group. Eight-year weight losses with an intensive life-
style intervention: the look AHEAD study. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2014;22:5-13.
61. Vallis M. Are behavioural interventions doomed to fail? Challenges to self-
management support in chronic Diseases. Can J Diabetes 2015;39:330-4.
62. Wadden TA, Hollander P, Klein S, et al.; NN8022-1923 Investigators. Weight 
maintenance and additional weight loss with liraglutide after low-calorie-diet-
induced weight loss : the SCALE Maintenance randomized study.  Int J Obes 
(Lond) 2013;37:1443-51.
63. Greenway FL, Fujioka K, Plodkowski RA, et al.; COR-I Study Group. Effect of nal-
trexone plus bupropion on weight loss in overweight and obese adults (COR-I): 
a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.  
Lancet 2010;376:595-605.
64. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al.; SCALE Obesity and Prediabetes NN8022-
1839 Study Group. A randomized, controlled trial of 3.0 mg of liraglutide in 
weight management. N Engl J Med 2015;373:11-22.
65. Richelsen B, Tonstad S, Rossner S, et al. Effect of orlistat on weight regain and 
cardiovascular risk factors following a very-low-energy diet in abdominally 
obese patients:a 3-year randomized, placebo-controlled study. Diabetes Care 
2007;30:27-32.
66. Rucker D, Padwal R, Li SK, et al. Long term pharmacotherapy for obesity and 
overweight: updated meta-analysis [published erratum in BMJ 2007;335:0-a].  
BMJ 2007;335:1194-9.
67. American Association of Diabetes Educators . Addressing obesity via diabetes 
self-management education and training. Diabetes Educ 2012;38:151-4.
68. Kaly P, Orellana S, Torrella T, et al. Unrealistic weight loss expectations in 
candidates for bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis 2008;4:6-10.
69. Sharma M. Behavioural interventions for preventing and treating obesity in 
adults. Obes Rev 2007;8:441-9.
70. Byrne NM, Meerkin JD, Laukkanen R, et al. Weight loss strategies for obese 
adults: personalized weight management program vs. standard care. Obesity 
(Silver Spring) 2006;14:1777-88.
71. Report card on access to obesity treatment for adults in Canada 2019. Edmonton: 
Obesity Canada; 2019.
72. Sharma AM, Ramos Salas X. Obesity prevention and management strategies in 
Canada: shifting paradigms and putting people first. Curr Obes Rep 2018;7:89-96.
73. Forhan M, Ramos Salas X. Inequities in healthcare: a review of bias and discrimi-
nation in obesity treatment. Can J Diabetes 2013;37:205-9.
74. Dietz WH, Baur LA, Hall K, et al. Management of obesity: improvement of health-
care training and systems for prevention and care. Lancet 2015;385:2521-33.
75. Sharma AM. Inequalities in access to bariatric surgery in Canada. CMAJ 
2016;188:317-8.
76. Freedhoff Y, Sharma AM. “Lose 40 pounds in 4 weeks”: regulating commercial 
weight-loss programs. CMAJ 2009;180:367-8.
77. Shekelle PG, Woolf SH, Eccles M, et al. Developing clinical guidelines. West J 
Med 1999;170:348-51.
78. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al.; AGREE Next Steps Consortium. 
AGREE II: advancing guideline development, reporting and evaluation in health 
care. CMAJ 2010;182:E839-42.
79. Crandall B, Klein G, Hoffman RR. Working minds: a practitioner’s guide to cognitive 
task analysis. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press; 2006.
80. DistillerSR enterprise plan. Ottawa: Evidence Partners: Available: www.
evidencepartners.com/products/distillersr-systematic-review-software/ (accessed 
2020 May 22).
81. Shekelle P, Woolf S, Grimshaw JM, et al. Developing clinical practice guidelines: 
reviewing, reporting, and publishing guidelines; updating guidelines; and the 
emerging issues of enhancing guideline implementability and accounting for 
comorbid conditions in guideline development. Implement Sci 2012;7:62.
82. Guyatt GH, Cooke DJ, Jaeschke R, et al. Grades of recommendation for anti-
thrombotic agents: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical 
Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest 2008;133(Suppl):123S-31S.
83. Badesch DB, Abman SH, Simonneau G, et al. Medical therapy for pulmonary 
arterial hypertension: updated ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 
Chest 2007;131:1917-28.
84. Rosenfeld RM, Shiffman RN. Clinical practice guideline development manual: a 
quality-driven approach for translating evidence into action. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 2009;140(Suppl 1):S1-43.
85. Obesity as a chronic medical disease [policy]. Ottawa: Canadian Medical Asso-
ciation; 2015, reviewed 2019 Mar. 3. Available: https://policybase.cma.ca/en/
permalink/policy11700 (accessed 2020 May 22).
86. Obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic — Report of a WHO Con-
sultation (WHO Technical Report Series 894). Geneva: World Health Organiza-
tion; 2000.
87. Ramos Salas X, Forhan M, Caulfield T, et al. A critical analysis of obesity prevention 
policies and strategies. Can J Public Health 2018;108:e598-608.
88. Canadian Obesity Advocacy Network (COAN). Edmonton: Obesity Canada. 
Available: https://obesitycanada.ca/coan (accessed 2020 May 22).
89. Brauer P, Gorber SC, Shaw E; Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care. 
Recommendations for prevention of weight gain and use of behavioural and 
pharmacologic interventions to manage overweight and obesity in adults in 
primary care. CMAJ 2015;187:184-95.
90. Jastreboff AM, Kotz CM, Kahan S, et al. Obesity as a disease: the Obesity Society 
2018 position statement. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2019;27:7-9.
91. Park B-y, Byeon K, Lee MJ, et al. The orbitofrontal cortex functionally links 
obesity and white matter hyperintensities. Sci Rep 2020;10:2930.
92. Look AHEAD Research Group; Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al. Cardiovascular 
effects of intensive lifestyle intervention in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med  
2013;369:145-54.
GUIDELINE
E890 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 
Competing interests: Sean Wharton reports receiving honoraria and 
travel expenses and has participated in academic advisory boards for 
Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Eli Lilly and Janssen. Sean Wharton is also 
the medical director of a medical clinic specializing in weight manage-
ment and diabetes. David Lau reports receiving grants and research 
support from AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk and the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research (CIHR); speaker bureau fees from AstraZeneca, Bausch 
Health, Boehringer Ingelheim, Diabetes Canada, Eli Lilly, Merck and 
Novo Nordisk; and consulting fees from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bausch 
Health, Boehringer Ingelheim, Gilead, HLS Therapeutics, Janssen, Eli 
Lilly and Novo Nordisk. Michael Vallis is a member of advisory boards for 
Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health and LifeScan. Michael Vallis has also re-
ceived consulting fees from Bausch Health, LifeScan, Novo Nordisk and 
Sanofi, and speaking fees from Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, Bausch Health, 
Abbott and AbbVie. Arya Sharma reports receiving speaker’s bureau and 
consulting fees from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Pharmaceuticals and Astra-
Zeneca. Laurent Biertho reports receiving grants from Johnson and 
Johnson and Medtronic, and is a member of advisory boards for Novo 
Nordisk and Bausch Health, outside the submitted work. Denise 
Campbell- Scherer has no personal financial relationships, but reports 
receiving research funding from the following sources in the past 
3 years: Novo Nordisk Alberta Diabetes Fund (NOVAD), a peer-reviewed 
grant that is a partnership between the University Hospital Foundation, 
Novo Nordisk and Alberta Innovates joint funders; Alberta Innovates 
Health Solutions (Cancer Prevention Research Opportunity and Collab-
orative Research and Innovation Opportunities competitions), CIHR 
(Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research and Knowledge-to-Action com-
petitions); Northern Alberta Family Medicine Fund; and the Alberta 
Cancer Prevention and Legacy Fund. She also reports receiving know-
ledge transfer funding from the following sources in the past 3 years: an 
unrestricted education grant from Obesity Canada, funded by Novo 
Nordisk Global; a Worldwide University Network Meeting Grant; an 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality R13 grant for a Healthcare 
Effectiveness and Outcomes Research; and a Physician Learning Pro -
gram grant from Alberta Health and the Alberta Medical Association. 
Angela Alberga reports receiving the following grants: the Santé Award 
from Fonds de Recherche du Quebec, the  Mitacs Accelerate Grant, and 
the Concordia University Start-up Team Grant, outside the submitted 
work. Jennifer Brown reports receiving nonfinancial support from Novo 
Nordisk, and personal fees from Bausch Health, Dietitians of Canada, 
Obesity Canada and the Canadian Association of Bariatric Physicians & 
Surgeons. Yoni Freedhoff is the co-owner of the Bariatric Medical Insti-
tute and Constant Health, which provide weight management services; 
Constant Health has received a grant from Novo Nordisk. Yoni Freedhoff 
is also the author of The Diet Fix: Why Diets Fail and How to Make Yours 
Work published by Crown Publishing Group, and receives royalties for 
the book. In addition, he is the sole author of the Weighty Matters blog 
and a column for Medscape and many other op-eds and articles in 
which he has publicly expressed opinions about the treatment, manage-
ment and prevention of obesity. Yoni Freedhoff also regularly speaks on 
topics related to obesity and receives honoraria and travel costs and ex-
penses for same. Michel Gagner reports receiving speaker honoraria 
from Ethicon, WL Gore and Medtronic; consulting fees from Novo Nord-
isk, Bausch Health and Lexington Medical; and holds stock options with 
Lexington Medical. Margaret Hahn reports receiving consulting fees 
from Alkermes. Marie-France Langlois reports receiving personal fees 
from Novo Nordisk, Valeant, Merck Canada, Sanofi, Eli Lilly and 
Boehringer Ingelheim; a grant from Merck Canada; and other fees from 
AstraZeneca and from TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) 
Study Group for diabetes clinical research as a principal investigator, all 
outside the submitted work. David Macklin reports receiving personal 
fees from Novo Nordisk and Bausch Health, outside the submitted work. 
Priya Manjoo reports receiving personal fees from Novo Nordisk, Bausch 
Health and Sanofi; and grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, Sanofi and 
AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. Marie-Philippe Morin reports 
receiving speaker honoraria from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Eli Lilly, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Nestlé Health Science, Janssen and AstraZeneca; 
research subvention from Novo Nordisk and Sanofi; and consultation 
honoraria from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Eli Lilly, Boehringer Ingel-
heim, Janssen and AstraZeneca. Sue Pedersen reports receiving 
personal fees from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Janssen, Eli Lilly, 
Merck, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Sanofi, Pfizer; grants from 
Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Sanofi; and nonfinan-
cial support from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Janssen, Eli Lilly, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Sanofi, outside the submitted 
work. Megha Poddar reports receiving honoraria for continuing medical 
education (CME) from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Jenssen, Merck, the Canadian Collaborative Re-
search Network and the Antibody Network; education grants from Novo 
Nordisk and Bausch Health; fees for mentorship from Novo Nordisk; 
fees for membership of advisory boards from Novo Nordisk and Bausch 
Health; and a quality improvement project grant from Boehringer 
Ingelheim. Paul Poirier reports receiving fees for consulting and con-
tinuing medical education from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Janssen, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk, Valeant and Bausch Health, outside the 
submitted work. Judy Shiau reports receiving personal fees from Novo 
Nordisk and Bausch Health, outside the submitted work. Diana Sherifali 
reports receiving consulting fees for advice regarding chronic disease 
and diabetes management from Merck, and a grant from Obesity Can-
ada to support the literature review process, during the conduct of the 
study. John Sievenpiper reports receiving grants from CIHR, the Nutri-
tion Trialists Fund at the University of Toronto, the International Nut 
and Dried Fruit Council Foundation, the Tate & Lyle Nutritional Research 
Fund at the University of Toronto, the American Society for Nutrition, 
the Glycemic Control and Cardiovascular Disease in Type 2 Diabetes 
Fund at the University of Toronto, the National Dried Fruit Trade Associ-
ation, PSI Graham Farquharson Knowledge Translation Fellowship, the 
Diabetes Canada Clinician Scientist award, the Banting & Best Diabetes 
Centre Sun Life Financial New Investigator Award, the Canada Founda-
tion for Innovation, and the Ministry of Research and Innovation’s 
Ontario Research Fund. Dr. Sievenpiper has received personal fees from 
Perkins Coie LLP, Tate & Lyle, Dairy Farmers of Canada, Pepsi Co, Food-
Minds LLC, European Fruit Juice Association, International Sweeteners 
Association, Nestlé Health Science, Canadian Society for Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, GI Foundation, Pulse Canada, Wirtschaftliche Vereini-
gung Zucker e.V., Abbott, Biofortis, the European Food Safety Authority, 
the  Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, the Soy Nutrition 
Institute and the Comité Européen des Fabricants de Sucre. 
Dr. Sievenpiper has received nonfinancial support from Tate & Lyle, 
PepsiCo, FoodMinds LLC, European Fruit Juice Association, Interna -
tional Sweeteners Association, Nestlé Health Science, Wirtschaftliche 
Vereinigung Zucker e.V., Abbott, Biofortis, the European Food Safety Au-
thority and the  Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, 
Kellogg Canada, American Peanut Council, Barilla, Unilever, Unico 
Primo, Loblaw Companies, WhiteWave Foods, Quaker, California Walnut 
Commission, Almond Board of California, outside the submitted work. 
Dr. Sievenpiper is a member of the International Carbohydrate Quality 
Consortium and the Clinical Practice Guidelines Expert Committees of 
Diabetes Canada, European Association for the Study of Diabetes, Can-
adian Cardiovascular Society, and Obesity Canada, and holds 
appointments as an Executive Board Member of the Diabetes and Nutri-
tion Study Group of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes, 
and as Director of the Toronto 3D Knowledge Synthesis and Clinical  Trials 
Foundation. He is also an unpaid scientific adviser for the Program in 
Food Safety, Nutrition and Regulatory Affairs and the Carbohydrates 
Committee of the International Life Science Institute North America. He 
has a spousal relationship with an employee of Anheuser-Busch InBev. 
Sanjeev Sockalingam reports receiving honoraria from Bausch Health 
Canada within the last 36  months. Valerie Taylor reports receiving 
speaker fees from Sunovion. Shahebina Walji reports receiving consulting 
GUIDELINE
 CMAJ  |  AUGUST 4, 2020  |  VOLUME 192  |  ISSUE 31 E891
or advisory board fees from Novo Nordisk, Bausch Health and Takeda and 
speaker’s bureau fees from Novo Nordisk and Bausch Health. Shahebina 
Walji also reports selling Optifast Meal replacements through a weight 
management centre Optifast is a product produced and sold by Nestlé. 
No other competing interests were declared. 
This article has been peer reviewed.
Affiliations: Departments of Medicine (Wharton), Endocrinology and 
Metabolism (Poddar, Sherifali), Family Medicine (Naji, Tytus) and Health 
Research Methods, Evidence and Impact Canada (Naji), McMaster Uni-
versity, Hamilton, Ont; The Wharton Medical Clinic (Wharton, Poddar), 
Hamilton, Ont.; Departments of Medicine (Lau, Nerenberg) and Family 
Medicine (Boyling, Henderson, McInnes, Walji, Wicklum), Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Julia McFarlane 
Diabetes Research Centre and Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta 
(Lau), Calgary, Alta.; Department of Family Medicine (Vallis, Piccinini-
Vallis), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS; Departments of Medicine 
(Sharma, Toth), Family Medicine (Campbell-Scherer, Kemp), Agricul-
tural, Food and Nutritional Science (Bell, Pereira), Physical Education 
and Recreation (Boulé), and Occupational Therapy (Forhan), University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alta.; Adult Bariatric Specialty Clinic (Sharma), 
Royal Alexandra Hospital, Edmonton, Alta.; Obesity Canada (Sharma, 
Patton, Ramos Salas), Edmonton, Alta.; Department of Surgery 
(Biertho), Laval University, Quebec, Que.; School of Human Kinetics 
(Adamo, Prud’homme), University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; Department 
of Health, Kinesiology & Applied Physiology (Alberga), Concordia Uni-
versity, Montréal, Que.; Bariatric Centre of Excellence (Brown), The 
Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ont.; Departments of Family Practice (Calam) 
and Endocrinology (Manjoo), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC; UBC Family Practice Residency Program (Calam) and Pfizer/ Heart 
and Stroke Foundation Chair in Cardiovascular Prevention Research 
(Lear), St. Paul’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC; nutrition consultant (Clarke), 
Hamilton, Ont.; Indigenous Health Dialogue (Crowshoe), Health Sci-
ences Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; Main East Medical 
Associates (Divalentino), Hamilton, Ont.; Bariatric Medical Institute 
(Freedhoff), Ottawa, Ont.; Department of Family Medicine (Freedhoff) 
and Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism (Shiau), Department of 
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ont.; Herbert Wertheim School 
of Medicine (Gagner), Florida International University, Miami, Fla.; Hôpi-
tal du Sacre Coeur de Montréal (Gagner), Montréal, Que.; Humber River 
Hospital (Glazer), Toronto, Ont.; Division of Endocrinology and Metab-
olism (Glazer), Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont.; Departments of Inter-
nal Medicine (Glazer), Psychiatry (Hawa, Sockalingam), Family and 
Community Medicine (Macklin) and Nutritional Sciences (Sievenpiper), 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont.; Alberta Health Services (Grand, 
Hung, Johnson-Stoklossa), Edmonton, Alta.; Departments of Family 
Medicine and Public Health Sciences and Policy Studies (Green), 
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont.; Kingston Health Sciences Centre 
(Green), Kingston, Ont.; Providence Care Hospital (Green), Kingston, 
Ont.; Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Hahn, Sockalingam), 
Toronto, Ont.; University Health Network (Hawa, Sockalingam), 
Toronto, Ont.; Division of General Surgery (Hong), McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ont.; Department of Family Medicine and Biobehavioral 
Health (Jacklin), University of Minnesota Medical School Duluth Cam -
pus, Duluth, Minn.; School of Kinesiology and Health Studies (Janssen), 
Queen’s University, Kingston, Ont.; School of Health and Human Perfor-
mance (Kirk), Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS; School of Kinesiology 
and Health Science (Wharton, Kuk), York University, Toronto, Ont.; Divi-
sion of Endocrinology (Langlois), Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 
Que.; Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux de 
l’Estrie - Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke (Langlois), Sher-
brooke, Que.; School of Kinesiology (Lear), Simon Fraser University, 
Vancouver, BC; Medcan Clinic (Macklin), Toronto, Ont.; Cardiometabolic 
Collaborative Clinic (Manjoo), Vancouver Island Health Authority, Victo-
ria, BC; Institut universitaire de cardiologie et de pneumologie de Qué-
bec (Morin, Poirier), Laval University, Québec, Que.; Foothills Medical 
Centre (Nerenberg), Calgary, Alta.; C-ENDO Diabetes & Endocrinology 
Clinic (Pedersen), Calgary, Alta.; LMC Diabetes and Endocrinology 
 (Poddar), Toronto, Ont.; Department of Medicine (Rueda-Clausen), Uni-
versity of Saskatchewan, Regina, Sask.; Regina General Hospital (Rueda-
Clausen), Regina, Sask.; Education Psychology (Russell-Mayhew), Werk-
lund School of Education, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; LEAF 
Weight Management Clinic (Shiau), Ottawa, Ont.; Heather M. Arthur 
Population Health Research Institute/Hamilton Health Sciences Chair in 
Interprofessional Health Research, School of Nursing (Sherifali), McMas-
ter University, Hamilton, Ont.; Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism 
(Sievenpiper), St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Ont.; Department of 
Psych iatry (Taylor), University of Calgary, Calgary, Alta.; School of Phar-
macy (Twells), Memorial University, St. John’s, NL; Steelcity Medical 
Clinic (Tytus), Hamilton, Ont.; Calgary Weight Management Centre 
(Walji), Calgary, Alta.; School of Population and Public Health (Walker), 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC; Centre for Excellence in 
Indigenous Health (Walker), University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC.; O’Brien Institute of Public Health (Wicklum), University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alta.
Contributors: All of the authors contributed to the conception and 
design of the work and the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of 
data. All of the authors drafted the manuscript, revised it critically for 
important intellectual content, gave final approval of the version to be 
published and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.  
Funding: Funding for this initiative was provided by Obesity Canada, 
the Canadian Association of Bariatric Physicians and Surgeons, and the 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research through a Strategy for Patient-
Oriented Research grant, with no participants or authors receiving any 
personal funding for their creation.
Acknowledgements: The authors thank Obesity Canada staff members 
Dawn Hatanaka, Nicole Pearce, Brad Hussey, Robert Fullerton and Patti 
Whitefoot-Bobier for their coordinating support as well as their contri-
butions for the development of the Obesity Guidelines website, online 
resources, tables and figures. The authors also thank members of the 
Obesity Canada Public Engagement Committee (Lisa Schaffer, Candace 
Vilhan, Kelly Moen, Doug Earle, Brenndon Goodman), who contributed 
to the creation of the research questions and reviewed key messages for 
individuals living with obesity and recommendations for health care 
providers. The authors also thank McMaster Evidence Review and Syn-
thesis Team (MERST) member Donna Fitzpatrick, who played a critical 
role in developing the methods needed for the guideline; and thank the 
reviewers whose comments helped to improve the chapters and this 
manuscript. The authors thank Barbara Kermode-Scott and Brad 
Hussey for editing the guidelines, Elham Kamran and Rubin Pooni for 
research assistance, and Jordan Tate from the Physician Learning Pro-
gram at the University of Alberta for designing the 5As framework for 
the guideline.
Correspondence to: Sean Wharton, sean.wharton@utoronto.ca