1231
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Table S1—Light treatment compared to placebo for ASWPD in adults.
Bibliography: APalmer et al., 2003; BCampbell et al., 1993. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both 
sides of the “no effect” line. 2CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. 3CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical 
significance threshold (defined by the TF) and the “no effect” line. aMT6, 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (urinary metabolite of melatonin); TST, total sleep time; ISL, 
initial sleep latency; SOT, sleep onset time; SOffT, sleep offset time; CBT Min, core body temperature minimum; CI, confidence interval; min, minutes; PSG, 
polysomnography; TF, task force.
Summary of Findings Tables (Tables S1–S12)
1232
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
RR Auger, HJ Burgess, JS Emens et al.
Table S2—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for DSWPD in adults with and without depression. 
Bibliography: AKayumov et al., 2001; BMundey et al., 2005; CRahman et al., 2010. *In studies with crossover design, where more than one measurements 
were taken on the same patients, all calculations were made based on the number of measurements. 1High level of heterogeneity. 2CI of the absolute 
effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. 3CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) 
and the “no effect” line. 4CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both sides of the “no effect” line. TST, 
total sleep time; ISL, initial sleep latency; DLMO, dim light melatonin onset; SOT, sleep onset time; SOffT, sleep offset time; CI, confidence interval; PSG, 
polysomnography; TF, task force; min, minutes.
Table S3—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for DSWPD in children/adolescents with no comorbidities.
Bibliography: van Geijlswijk et al., 2010. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF on both sides of the “no effect” 
line. 2CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) and the “no effect” line. 3CI of the absolute effect crosses the 
clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. DLMO, dim light melatonin onset; ISL, initial sleep latency; SOT, sleep onset time; CI, confidence interval; 
mg, milligrams; min, minutes; kg, kilograms; TF, task force.
1233
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Table S4—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for DSWPD in children/adolescents comorbid with psychiatric conditions.
Bibliography: ASmits et al., 2001; Bvan der Heijden et al., 2007. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the “no effect” line and the clinical significance threshold 
defined by the TF. 2CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. 3CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical 
significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both sides of  the “no effect” line. TST, total sleep time; ISL, initial sleep latency; DLMO, dim light melatonin 
onset; SOT, sleep onset time; SOffT, sleep offset time; CI, confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
Table S5—Vitamin B12 compared to placebo for DSWPD in adults.
Bibliography: Okawa et al., 1997. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. TST, total sleep time; SOT, sleep 
onset time; CI, confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
1234
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
RR Auger, HJ Burgess, JS Emens et al.
Table S6—Light/combination treatment compared to controls for DSWPD in adults.
Bibliography: ACole et al., 2002; BLack, Bramwell et al., 2007. 1This is a short paper with lack of detail in methods and results; a lot of information is missing. 
2Confidence interval of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both sides of the “no effect line.” 3Confidence 
interval of the absolute effect crosses the “no effect” line. 4Confidence interval of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by 
the TF. TST, total sleep time; SOT, sleep onset time; SOffT, sleep offset time; aMT6, 6-sulfatoxymelatonin (urinary metabolite of melatonin); CI, confidence 
interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
Table S7—Light/combination treatment (multicomponent behavioral interventions + light) compared to controls for DSWPD in 
children/adolescents.
Bibliography: Gradisar et al., 2011. 1Study was not blinded, and an intention to treat analysis was NOT utilized. 2CI of the absolute effect does not reach 
clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. TST, total sleep time; ISL, initial sleep latency; SOT, sleep onset time; SOffT, sleep offset time; CI, 
confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
1235
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
Treatment of Intrinsic Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Table S8—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for N24SWD in blind adults.
Bibliography: Lockley et al., 2000; Sack et al., 2000; Hack et al., 2003. CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.
Table S9—Light treatment compared to placebo for ISWRD in elderly with dementia.
Bibliography: ADowling et al., 2008; BMishima et al., 1994. 1A. No intention-to-treat principle: only completed cases were analyzed. B. Selective reporting: 
dropouts are not described and some actigraphy variables are not reported (sleep onset, offset, sleep efficiency etc.). 2CI of the absolute value crosses the 
clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both sides of the “no effect” line. 3A. No blinding, B. No intention-to-treat principle observed. C. Role 
of control group is vaguely described. 3CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both side of the “no effect” 
line. TST, total sleep time; CI, confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
Table S10—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for ISWRD in elderly with dementia.
Bibliography: Serfaty et al., 2002. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold (defined by the TF) on both sides of “no effect” line. 
TST, total sleep time; CI, confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minute.
Table S11—Melatonin treatment compared to placebo for ISWRD in children/adolescents with neurologic disorders.
Bibliography: Wright et al., 2011. 1CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold defined by the TF. TST, total sleep time; ISL, initial 
sleep latency; CI, confidence interval; TF, task force; min, minutes.
1236
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 11, No. 10, 2015
RR Auger, HJ Burgess, JS Emens et al.
Table S12—Comparison of combination of light therapy and melatonin/placebo for ISWRD in elderly with dementia.
Bibliography: Dowling et al., 2008. 1A. No intention-to-treat principle: only completed cases were analyzed. B. Selective reporting: dropouts are not 
described and some actigraphy variables are not reported (sleep onset,/offset, etc.). 2CI of the absolute effect crosses the clinical significance threshold 
(defined by the TF) on both sides of the “no effect” line. PSWS, prescribed sleep-wake scheduling; TST, total sleep time; CI, confidence interval; TF, task 
force; min, minutes.