Comparative ef ﬁcacy of aerobic
exercise and mind-body
practices in improving sleep
quality and psychological distress
among elderly breast cancer
patients: a systematic review
Cai Cui1, Wei Liang1 and Xin Liu1,2*
1Department of Arts and Physical Education, Henan Technical College of Construction,
Zhengzhou, China, 2College of Physical Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China
Elderly breast cancer patients often face severe sleep disturbances and
psychological distress due to the disease itself and its treatment process,
signiﬁcantly reducing their quality of life. In recent years, non-pharmacological
interventions, represented by aerobic exercise and mind-body practices, have
demonstrated great potential in improving the physical and mental health of
patients. This paper aims to systematically review existing literature and compare
the effects of aerobic exercise and mind-body practices on sleep quality and
psychological distress in elderly breast cancer patients. The review focuses on
analyzing the similarities and diffe rences between the two intervention
approaches in improving sleep architec ture, alleviating psychological stress
including anxiety and depression, and their associated physiological
mechanisms. By synthesizing the late st evidence from clinical trials and
intervention studies, this paper explores the clinical application value of these
two intervention strategies, identi ﬁes current research limitations, and suggests
future research directions. This aims to provide theoretical foundations and
practical guidance for developing individualized, precision rehabilitation plans
tailored to elderly breast cancer patients.
KEYWORDS
aerobic exercise, breast cancer, mind-body practice, psychological distress, sleep
quality
1 Introduction
With advances in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment technologies, patient survival
rates have signi ﬁcantly improved. This has increasingly shifted clinical focus to post-
treatment quality of life, particularly among elderly patients ( 1).
Globally, breast cancer incidence continues to rise, with projections indicating 3.2
million new cases and 1.1 million deaths worldwide by 2050, making it the most common
cancer globally. Notably, while this review focuses on elderly patients, breast cancer
incidence among younger wom en is also increasing, under scoring the necessity of
providing age-appropriate survivorship care throughout the entire lifespan ( 2).
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org01
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Alba Esteban-Simo´ n,
University of Almeria, Spain
REVIEWED BY
Ewelina Czenczek- Lewandowska,
University of Rzeszow, Poland
Nuria Mar ı´n Jime´ nez,
University of Almeria, Spain
*CORRESPONDENCE
Xin Liu
Liuxin1028@163.com
RECEIVED 28 January 2026
REVISED 28 February 2026
ACCEPTED 03 March 2026
PUBLISHED 25 March 2026
CITATION
Cui C, Liang W and Liu X (2026)
Comparative efﬁcacy of aerobic exercise
and mind-body practices in improving
sleep quality and psychological distress
among elderly breast cancer patients: a
systematic review.
Front. Oncol. 16:1798402.
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
COPYRIGHT
© 2026 Cui, Liang and Liu. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY).The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does
not comply with these terms.
TYPE Review
PUBLISHED 25 March 2026
DOI 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Within this population, sleep disturbances and psychological
distress, anxiety and depression are highly prevalent. These issues
not only severely impact the recovery progress and life satisfaction
of patients, but may also exacerbate other cancer-related symptoms
through complex psychophysiological mechanisms, creating a
vicious cycle ( 3, 4). Research indicates that poor sleep quality
correlates with higher levels of depression, fatigue, and poorer
quality of life, with these effects potentially persisting for months
or even years after treatment concludes ( 3). Psychological distress,
particularly anxiety and depression, exhibits high prevalence among
breast cancer patients. A screening study of young breast cancer
survivors found that over one- ﬁfth of participants met criteria for
major depressive disorder, with these symptoms closely linked to
anxiety, fatigue, insomnia, and other issues ( 4).Notably, a
bidirectional relatio nship exists between psychological distress
and physical symptoms. Patients with a history of psychological
distress reported higher levels of pain, fatigue, sleep dif ﬁculties, and
poorer self-rated health both before and after treatment ( 5).
Furthermore, fatigue, sleep disturbances, anxiety, and depression
often cluster together, mutually reinforcing each other and
collectively impairing cognitive function and quality of life ( 6, 7).
The existence of these symptom clusters often limits the
effectiveness of interventions targeting a single symptom.
Therefore, it is necessary to explore comprehensive intervention
strategies that can simultaneously improve multiple symptoms.
Given the potential side effects and dependency associated with
drug therapies, non-pharmacological interventions have garnered
signiﬁcant attention for their safety and multifaceted health bene ﬁts
(8). Among these, aerobic exercise and mind-body practices
represent two crucial non-pharmacological approaches. Walking,
jogging, and cycling are common forms of aerobic exercise that
have been proven to effectively improve cardiopulmonary function,
reduce fatigue, and enhance overall health in cancer survivors ( 9).
For instance, a study involving overweight or obese breast, prostate,
and colorectal cancer survivors found that a 16-week circuit interval
aerobic and resistance training intervention signi ﬁcantly improved
self-reported sleep quality, and this improvement was signi ﬁcantly
associated with reduced insulin resistance ( 9). Even during
exceptional periods like the COVID-19 pandemic, a 16-week
online home-based exercise intervention demonstrated signi ﬁcant
improvements in sleep quality, reduced sleep latency, and increased
sleep duration and efﬁciency among breast cancer patients ( 10). On
the other hand, mind-body practices, such as meditation, yoga, Tai
Chi, and hypnotherapy focus on alleviating stress, improving mood,
and promoting relaxation by regulating mind-body connections
(11). A randomized controlled trial evaluated the effects of a group
intervention combining self-care and self-hypnosis on post-
treatment cancer patients, and found it signi ﬁcantly improved
fatigue, sleep, and emotional distress ( 11). Furthermore, cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia has been shown to effectively
reduce fatigue in cancer survivors, with this improvement largely
mediated through alleviating insomnia symptoms ( 12).
Beyond standard multidisciplinary integrated care involving
surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and endocrine therapy, the
roles of various health professionals have been increasingly
recognized as crucial in comprehensive cancer care. Psychologists
and physical therapists play particularly vital roles in the later stages
of treatment, collaborating with patients to address the multifaceted
consequences of cancer and its therapies ( 13).Maintaining optimal
physical and mental activity throughout cancer treatment is crucial
for achieving positive therap eutic outcomes and enhancing
women’s well-being ( 14).
Although aerobic exercise and mind-body practices have each
demonstrated potential in improving speci ﬁc symptoms among
cancer patients, systematic summaries and evaluations of their
direct comparative ef ﬁcacy in enhancing sleep quality and
alleviating psychological dist ress among elderly breast cancer
patients remain lacking ( 15). Existing research suggests that
breast cancer survivors acros s different age groups may face
distinct psychosocial challenges. For instance, younger survivors
may report more severe fatigue, loneliness, daytime sleepiness, and
stress (15). Therefore, for the speci ﬁc elderly population, clarifying
the functional characteristics and relative advantages of different
exercise modalities is crucial f or developing individualized,
precision non-pharmacological intervention plans. This study
aims to systematically evaluate and compare the effects of aerobic
exercise versus mind-body practices on sleep quality and
psychological distress in elderly breast cancer patients, based on
the latest clinical research evidence. This systematic review seeks to
provide more targeted scienti ﬁc evidence for clinical practice,
thereby optimizing patient management and enhancing their
long-term quality of life.
2 Current status of sleep disorders
and psychological distress in elderly
breast cancer patients
2.1 Impact of breast cancer treatments on
sleep
Various breast cancer treatments including surgery,
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and endocrine therapy pose
signiﬁcant challenges to sleep quality, resulting in persistently
high prevalence rates of sleep disorders. A systematic review
indicates that the overall reported rate of sleep disorders among
patients undergoing breast cancer treatment is approximately 60%
(16). Speci ﬁcally, using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)
for assessment, the average prevalence of poor sleep quality (PSQI >
5) following surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and endocrine
therapy was 63%, 62%, 64%, and 57%, respectively ( 16). These data
indicate that sleep problems are a common concern for breast
cancer patients regardless of treatment modality. Notably,
chemotherapy is the most extensively studied treatment modality.
Among studies evaluating chemotherapy, 62% reported a
signiﬁcant increase in treatment-related sleep disturbances ( 16).
An observational study involving 245 breast cancer patients further
conﬁrmed that women undergoing chemotherapy exhibited more
severe insomnia symptoms and poorer sleep quality, with an
increased number of chemotherapy cycles correlating with
worsening insomnia symptoms ( 17). These treatments not only
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org02
directly disrupt sleep but also create a vicious cycle with sleep
disturbances through their side effects. For instance, treatment-
related pain and fatigue are key factors exacerbating sleep disorders.
A cross-sectional study found that breast cancer patients with sleep
disorders were more likely to experience severe pain ( 18). Pre-
radiotherapy sleep disturbances were also signi ﬁcantly associated
with increased pain during treatment ( 19). Furthermore, cancer-
related fatigue, which is closely intertwined with sleep disorders, is
highly prevalent among breast cancer patients ( 20). This mutually
reinforcing relationship between treatment side effects and sleep
disorders severely impacts quality of life. Research indicates that
sleep disturbances are associated with a signi ﬁcant deterioration in
quality of life, affecting both daily functioning and symptom
intensity ( 17 ). Therefore, systematically identifying and
addressing sleep issues throughout the breast cancer care
continuum is crucial to breaking this vicious cycle and improving
overall health outcomes.
2.2 Manifestations of psychological distress
in elderly breast cancer patients
Signiﬁcant psychological distress is prevalent among elderly
breast cancer patients, presenting in diverse and complex forms.
Multiple studies indicate that anxiety, depression, and mood swings
are the most common psychological symptoms among this patient
group ( 21). A cross-sectional study of elderly cancer patients in
China found that approximately 29.7% of participants exhibited
high levels of psychological distress, often accompanied by poorer
quality of life ( 21). Notably, while breast cancer patients tend to
experience relatively milder depressive symptoms compared to
other cancer types, anxiety symptoms remain particularly
prominent ( 22). This psychological dis tress not only affects
patients’ emotional states but also signi ﬁcantly reduces treatment
adherence and quality of life, creating a vicious cycle.
A complex bidirectional rel ationship exists between
psychological distress and sleep disorders. On one hand,
persistent psychological stress disrupts sleep rhythms, leading to
difﬁculties in falling asleep and maintaining sleep ( 21). On the other
hand, reduced sleep quality exacerbates anxiety and depressive
symptoms, further intensifyi ng the vicious cycle of symptom
progression. This interaction is particularly pronounced among
elderly breast cancer patients, as older adults inherently possess
more fragile sleep architecture ( 22). Studies further indicate that
patients with speci ﬁc demographic characteristics, such as being
female, living alone, having higher education levels, or bearing
ﬁnancial burdens, appear more susceptible to psychological
distress ( 21).
Additionally, elderly breast cancer patients face unique
psychological challenges. Compa red to younger patients, they
must cope not only with the shock of a cancer diagnosis but also
with multiple stressors associated with aging ( 23).Some studies
indicate that the concerns of elderly patients about disease
prognosis, fears of treatment side effects, and anxieties about
family responsibilities may all contribute to increased
psychological burden ( 24). Notably, the manifestations of
psychological distress may vary across cultural contexts,
suggesting the need for individualized psychological intervention
strategies ( 21). Overall, psychological distress, as a common
comorbid symptom among elde rly breast cancer patients,
warrants sufﬁcient attention from clinicians and requires targeted
intervention measures.
2.3 The reciprocal relationship between
sleep disorders and psychological distress
A complex bidirectional relationship exists between sleep
disorders and psychological distress, with multiple studies
demonstrating a signi ﬁcant positive correlation between the two.
A cross-sectional study of Iranian adolescents found that sleep
hygiene partially mediated the association between gaming disorder
(GD) and depressive symptoms, suggesting poor sleep habits may
exacerbate depression in GD adolescents ( 25). Similarly, Mendelian
randomization studies provide genetic evidence linking depression
to increased sepsis risk, while post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
correlates with intensive care requirements for sepsis, suggesting
psychological distress may impact physical health through
neuroendocrine or in ﬂammatory pathways ( 26). In families with
children on the autism spectrum (ASD), parental depressive
symptoms signi ﬁcantly correlated with childhood sleep
disruption, indicating sleep problems may amplify psychological
burdens through family interactions ( 27).
The underlying mechanisms may involve multisystem
interactions. Neuroendocrin e dysregulation is a central
component, where prolonged psychological distress can lead to
hyperactivation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis,
disrupting cortisol secretion rhythms and subsequently impairing
the sleep-wake cycle. A study on COVID-19 patients demonstrated
that short-term mindfulness meditation signi ﬁcantly improved
sleep quality and reduced depression scores by enhancing
mindfulness levels, suggesting psychological interventions may
regulate autonomic nervous function to improve sleep ( 28).
Inﬂammatory responses represent another critical pathway.
Clinical data from trigeminal neuralgia patients indicate that sleep
disturbances and obsessive thoughts are signi ﬁcantly correlated
with Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) pain scores and Self-Rating
Depression Scale (SDS) scores. suggesting chronic pain may
inﬂuence sleep and mood through pro-in ﬂammatory cytokine
release ( 29). Surveys of atopic dermatitis patients further con ﬁrm
that 73% experience poor sleep quality, with more severe sleep
disturbances among those at risk for depression. This indicates skin
itching and psychological distress may form a vicious cycle via Th2-
type immune responses ( 30).
This interplay exhibits speciﬁcity across populations. A study of
Chinese psychiatric nurses found signi ﬁcant correlations between
psychological distress and negative coping styles (r=0.266) and
sleep quality (r=0.532), with sl eep quality partially mediating
(37.97%) the relationship between negative coping and
psychological distress ( 31). Studies on pediatric allergic diseases
indicate that allergic rhinitis correlates with multiple sleep
disturbances including irregular sleep patterns, morning fatigue,
with sleep issues mediating the association between allergic
conditions and psychological distress ( 32) .F o rp a t i e n t sw i t h
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org03
somatic pain, chain mediation analysis con ﬁrmed a sequential
mediating role of psychological distress and sleep disorders
between physical pain and temporomandibular joint pain
disorders, highlighting the “pain-emotion-sleep ” triadic
relationship ( 33). Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate that the
interaction between sleep disorders and psychological distress is
moderated by multiple factors including individual disease status,
coping strategies, and social support, necessitating comprehensive
intervention strategies.
3 Effects of aerobic exercise on sleep
and mental health in elderly breast
cancer patients
3.1 Physiological mechanisms of aerobic
exercise
The physiological mechanisms underlying aerobic exercise ’s
improvement of sleep quality and psychological distress are
multifaceted, primarily involving core pathways such as
neurotransmitter regulation, metabolic balance, and in ﬂammation
control. First, aero bic exercise signi ﬁcantly modulates
neurotransmitter levels in the central nervous system, particularly
serotonin and dopamine, thereby directly in ﬂuencing sleep
architecture and emotional states. Research indicates that even a
single aerobic session can regulate cortical excitability, a process
linked to changes in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) system
activity. GABA is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
CNS, crucial for promoting sleep and alleviating anxiety ( 34). A
cross-over study in healthy subjects further con ﬁrmed that a single
aerobic session not only enhances motor sequence learning ability
but also increases cortical excitability. Moreover, changes in cortical
excitability, particularly reduced short-term intracortical inhibition,
correlating with the degree of improvement in motor learning, this
suggests exercise in ﬂuences neuroplasticity by modulating
GABAergic activity, with such neuroplastic changes forming the
basis for cognitive and emotional improvements ( 34). Furthermore,
regular aerobic exercise has been shown to strengthen functional
connectivity between the hippocampus and cortex, an enhancement
beneﬁcial for emotional regulation and stress response ( 35). These
neurophysiological adaptations collectively constitute the
neurobiological basis for ef ﬁcacy of aerobic exercise in improving
sleep and mood disorders, as illustrated in Figure 1 .
Second, aerobic exercise indirectly yet effectively alleviates
fatigue and psychological stress by promoting systemic metabolic
balance and reducing systemic in ﬂammation levels. Exercise-
induced physiological adaptatio ns involve complex molecular
pathways. For instance, studies reveal that mitochondrial open
reading frame 12S rRNA-c (MOTS-c) and aerobic training
activate the NRG1-ErbB4-C/EBP b pathway to induce cardiac
physiological adaptations, improving myocardial morphology and
function (36). This enhancement of cardiac function contributes to
elevated overall physiological reserve, counteracting fatigue. More
importantly, aerobic exercise effectively modulates in ﬂammatory
responses. A cross-sectional study indicated that habitual aerobic
exercise correlates with lower levels of in ﬂammatory markers, such
as white blood cell, neutrophil, and platelet counts, with this anti-
inﬂammatory effect partially mediated by elevated total serum
bilirubin levels —a substance possessing antioxidant and anti-
inﬂammatory properties ( 37). Long-term voluntary aerobic
exercise in mice demonstrated that exercise is closely linked to
maintaining physiological function during aging by altering plasma
metabolomics, particularly through increased levels of metabolites
like spermidine associated wi th cellular quality control ( 38).
Enhanced autophagy facilitates the clearance of damaged cellular
components and maintains intracellular homeostasis, which is
crucial for alleviating chronic fatigue and stress. Furthermore,
studies on high-intensity interval training (HIIT) in patients with
metabolic syndrome demonstrate that exercise improves metabolic
syndrome scores, with this improvement particularly correlated
with reductions in blood pressure and waist circumference ( 39
).
The amelioration of metabolic syndrome signi ﬁes enhanced insulin
sensitivity, optimized lipi d metabolism, and decreased
inﬂammatory markers. These systemic bene ﬁcial changes
collectively create a favorable physiological internal environment
conducive to alleviating psychological distress and improving sleep.
3.2 Clinical evidence and intervention
outcomes
Aerobic exercise demonstrates clear clinical evidence in
improving sleep quality among elderly breast cancer patients. A
16-week pilot study examined the effects of moderate-to-high-
intensity aerobic exercise combined with resistance training,
delivered in a circuit-based, interval pattern, on sleep quality
among cancer survivors ( 9). The study randomly assigned
sedentary, overweight, or obese survivors of breast, prostate, and
colorectal cancers to either an exercise group (n=60) or a usual care
group (n=30). The exercise intervention comprised three weekly
sessions of supervised, moderate-to-high-intensity aerobic exercise
(65-85% VO2max) and resistance training (65-85% 1RM)
performed in a circuit-interval format. Sleep quality was assessed
using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Results showed
signiﬁcant improvement in PSQI total scores in the exercise group
compared to the usual care group post-intervention (mean
difference between groups: -2.7; 95% CI, -4.2 to -0.6), with lower
PSQI scores indicating improv ed subjective sleep quality ( 8).
F u r t h e ra n a l y s i sr e v e a l e das i g n iﬁcant negative correlation
between PSQI improvement and reduced insulin resistance
(assessed via HOMA-IR) in the exercise group (r = -0.91;
p<0.01), suggesting that exe rcise-induced sleep quality
improvement may be associated with positive changes in
metabolic health ( 8). This study provides strong evidence that
aerobic combined with resistance training serves as an effective
non-pharmacological intervention to improve sleep quality in
cancer survivors, including breast cancer patients, and may confer
metabolic bene ﬁts.
Even during exceptional periods like the COVID-19 pandemic,
aerobic exercise interventions demonstrated adaptability and
efﬁcacy. An exploratory study evaluated the impact of a 16-week
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org04
online home-based exercise program on sleep quality in breast
cancer patients ( 10). The program delivered functional training via
Zoom, with 15 participants completing the intervention. Sleep
quality was assessed using the PSQI and accelerometers. Results
showed a signi ﬁcant decrease in participants ’ PSQI total scores,
indicating improved subjective sleep quality manifested as shorter
sleep latency, increased total sleep time, and enhanced sleep
efﬁciency. Objective measurements further supported these
ﬁndings, demonstrating increased total sleep time and reduced
average wake duration. This pilot study demonstrates that online
aerobic exercise interventions can effectively enhance sleep quality
among breast cancer survivors. It underscores the importance of
integrating exercise into patie nt care, particularly during
exceptional circumstances like pandemic lockdowns, offering a
viable alternative for patients unable to participate in in-person
group exercise sessions ( 10).
3.3 The ef ﬁcacy of aerobic exercise in
alleviating psychological distress
As a non-pharmacological inte rvention, aerobic exercise
demonstrates signi ﬁcant potential in alleviating psychological
distress among cancer patients, particularly elderly breast cancer
patients. Its core mechanism lies in enhancing overall mental
health by improving emotional regulation and reducing anxiety
and depressive symptoms. Multiple studies con ﬁrm that aerobic
exercise effectively regulates neurotransmitter and hormone levels,
thereby improving emotional states ( 40). For instance, a one-year
randomized controlled trial involving prostate cancer patients found
that those receiving supervised aerobic and resistance combined
training exhibited signi ﬁcantly reduced depression and anxiety
symptoms at the midpoint of the intervention (6 months) ( 41).
Similarly, studies in ﬁbromyalgia patients indicate that aerobic
exercise improves depression, anxiety, and stress levels through its
neuroendocrine system remodeling effects (40). A systematic review
and meta-analysis for lung cancer patients further supports this
conclusion, showing that exercise interventions, particularly those
incorporating aerobic exercise, signi ﬁcantly reduce anxiety and
depression levels ( 42).Collectively, this evidence indicates that
aerobic exercise effectively mitigates negative emotional experiences
through direct physiological mechanisms, such as promoting
endorphin release and regulating hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis function, thereby providing emotional buffering for patients.
Beyond direct psychophysiological bene ﬁts, aerobic exercise
interventions indirectly alleviate psychological stress by fostering
social interaction and enhancing self-ef ﬁcacy. Participation in
structured, often group-based exercise programs creates valuable
social opportunities, helping reduce loneliness and build social
support networks ( 43). A pilot study among patients receiving
opioid agonist therapy found that despite low intervention
attendance, participants reported that exercising in a clinic setting
fostered connections with clinicians and enhanced social engagement
and self-conﬁdence. This sense of social connection and support from
peers and professionals serves as a potent psychological resource.
Simultaneously, successfully achieving exercise goals, such as
maintaining training consistency or improving physical ﬁtness,
signiﬁcantly boosts patients ’ self-efﬁcacy, or their belief in their
ability to overcome challenges and accomplish tasks. This
heightened sense of control is crucial for individuals enduring long-
term illness. For instance, studies among breast cancer patients
indicate that exercise interventions, by improving physical function
and self-management skills, help alleviate treatment-related
helplessness and psychological burdens ( 44). Thus, aerobic exercise
not only directly in ﬂuences mood but also multidimensionally
alleviates patients ’ psychological distress by fostering a positive
psychosocial environment and a sense of personal capability.
4 Effects of mind-body exercises on
sleep and mental health in elderly
breast cancer patients
4.1 Theoretical basis of mind-body
exercises
Mind-body exercises (MBEs) constitute a comprehensive
intervention integrating physical movements, breath regulation,
and mental focus. Their theoretical foundation is rooted in
autonomic nervous system regula tion and psychophysiological
integration mechanisms. These practices encompass diverse forms
among yoga, tai chi, qigong, and meditation. Through speci ﬁc
postures, breathing rhythms, and guided attention, they regulate
sympathetic nervous system excitability, promoting psychological
relaxation and physiological equilibrium ( 45). Research indicates
that mind-body exercises signi ﬁcantly reduce cortisol levels and
increase parasympathetic activity, thereby improving stress
responses and emotional states ( 46). This effect is particularly
pronounced in older adults, where sustained practice enhances
autonomic nervous system adaptability and reduces age-related
increases in sympathetic nervous system tension ( 47).
From a cognitive-emotional regulation perspective, mind-body
practices exert effects through dual pathways: On one hand,
repetitive movement patterns and breathing rhythms can form
conditioned responses, inhibiting excessive amygdala activation
and reducing emotional reactivity to negative stimuli ( 48). On the
other hand, non-judgmental awareness of present experiences can
reshape the prefrontal cortex ’s regulatory function over the limbic
system, enhancing emotional regulation capacity ( 49).Randomized
controlled trials show that breast cancer survivors undergoing 12
weeks of yoga intervention exhibit signi ﬁcantly reduced negative
emotion scores. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
reveals enhanced default mode ne twork connectivity, closely
associated with reduced self-referential thinking and improved
emotional stability ( 50).
At the neuroplasticity level, mind-body practices promote
brain-derived neurotrophi cf a c t o r( B D N F )s e c r e t i o n ,
strengthening synaptic connections between the hippocampus
and prefrontal cortex to improve cognitive function and
psychological resilience ( 51). A network meta-analysis of
Parkinson ’s disease patients found that yoga practitioners
signi ﬁcantly outperformed conventional exercise groups in
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org05
Uniﬁed Parkinson ’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor scores
and depression symptom improv ement, suggesting mind-body
practices possess unique neur oprotective effects against
neurodegenerative diseases ( 52). Furthermore, through functional
reorganization of the somatosen sory cortex and insula, these
practices enhance perceptual accuracy of internal physiological
signals, a change positively correlated with improved emotional
regulation capacity ( 53).
From a traditional medical perspective, mind-body practices
like qigong and tai chi originate from Chinese medical theory of
unity of body and spirit, emphasizing the restoration of yin-yang
balance through the coordinated regulation of posture, breathing,
and mind ( 54). Modern research con ﬁrms that this holistic view
aligns closely with contemporary psychosomatic medicine theories
of multi-system interactions, such as the brain-gut axis, and brain-
immune axis. For instance, practicing baduanjin signi ﬁcantly
improves circadian rhythm stability in sub-health individuals
while regulating yang de ﬁciency and yin de ﬁciency constitution
scores, indicating its bidirectional regulation of autonomic nervous
function and metabolic status ( 55). This multi-targeted, holistic
action makes mind-body practices particularly suitable for
addressing the common comorbidity of sleep disorders and
psychological distress in elderly breast cancer patients. Aerobic
exercise and mind-body practices exert differing effects on sleep
quality through distinct pathways, as shown in Table 1 .
4.2 Clinical research ﬁndings
Clinical studies have identiﬁed diverse intervention pathways to
improve sleep quality and psychological distress among cancer
TABLE 1 Characteristics of included studies on exercise and mind-body interventions for sleep quality and psychological outcomes in cancer survivors.
Intervention Authors Sleep quality metrics
Psychological
distress
indicators
Physiological
indicators Key ﬁndings
AE
Normann
et al. (2022)
(9)
PSQI NR insulin resistance Improvements in PSQI are signi ﬁcantly
associated with reduced insulin resistance
AE
Sagarra-
Romero
et al. (2022)
(10)
Shorter sleep latency
Increased total sleep time
Improved sleep ef ﬁciency
NR NR improvements in subjective and objective
sleep quality.
AE Talotta et al.
(2022) ( 40) PSQI Depression, anxiety,
and stress levels
Rewiring of the
Neuroendocrine System
Exercise improves depression, anxiety,
and stress by regulating
neurotransmitters and hormones
AE Galvao et al.
(2020) ( 41) NR Depression and
anxiety
Muscle Strength
Functional Capacity
Hormones
Combined aerobic and resistance
training signi ﬁcantly reduces
psychological distress
AE De Nys et al.
(2024) ( 68) PSQI psychological
distress Decreased cortisol levels Physical activity can slightly reduce
cortisol levels and improve sleep quality
Mind-body
Practice
Gregoire
et al. (2020)
(11)
MFI-20 Fatigue Inventory, ISI
Insomnia Severity Index, Wrist-
Worn Sleep Monitor
HADS Anxiety and
Depression Scale
PSWQ Worry
Questionnaire
Wrist-based activity tracker
monitors steps and hours of
physical activity
Self-care interventions signi ﬁcantly
improved fatigue, sleep, emotional
distress, and cognitive function
MBP
Van der
et al. (2020)
(73)
NR
Depression Anxiety
Stress Scale
Emotional Distress
Functional brain
connectivity
Structural brain changes
Mindfulness Intervention Alleviates
Emotional Distress and Fatigue
MBP
Osypiuk
et al. (2020)
(78)
Symptoms of Sleep Disorders Depression Anxiety
Stress
Pain
Fatigue
Nociceptive Awareness
Fatigue, anxiety, depression, perceived
stress, and self-esteem, signi ﬁcant
improvements were demonstrated
MBP Wong et al.
(2022) ( 63) Polysomnography
State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory, Pre-Sleep
Arousal Scale
Sleep architecture
sleep fragmentation index,
slow-wave activity
spectral band power
Subjective sleep quality improved across
the board
MBP Liu et al.
(2022) ( 66) PSQI Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Anxiety, depression Grip Strength, Joint Range
of Motion, Lung Capacity Yoga Improves Sleep Quality
MBP Liu et al.
(2023) ( 69)
PSQI Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index,VSHSS Sleep Scale NR NR Taichi signi ﬁcantly improves sleep
quality
MBP
Wunderlin
et al. (2024)
(62)
PSQI Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index, Polysomnography,
Subjective Sleep Quality
FFMQ-SF Five-
Factor Mindfulness
Questionnaire
High-frequency power
low-wave activity
Individuals with high mindfulness report
better subjective sleep quality
AE, Aerobic Exercise; MBP: Mind-body practice; PSQI, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index; NR, Not Reported; HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale ; MFI-20, Multidimensional Fatigue
Inventory-20; VSHSS, Verran and Snyder-Halpern Sleep Scale; FFMQ-SF, Five-Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire-Short Form; STAI, State-Trait Anxie ty Inventory; PSAS, Pre-Sleep Arousal
Scale; PSWQ, Penn State Worry Questionnaire.
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org06
patients, particularly elderly breast cancer patients. A randomized
controlled trial involving cancer patients who had completed
treatment evaluated the ef ﬁcacy of a group intervention
combining self-care with self-hypnosis ( 11). This study enrolled
95 female patients with various cancers. Results demonstrated
signiﬁcant group-by-time interaction effects in the intervention
group compared to the waitlist control group, indicating marked
improvements in fatigue, sleep, emotional distress, and cognitive
function. This study conﬁrmed that group interventions integrating
self-hypnosis techniques effectively enhance post-treatment quality
of life for cancer patients, parti cularly in alleviating fatigue,
improving sleep, and redu cing emotional distress ( 56). This
demonstrates that interventions centered on psychological skill
training can directly in ﬂuence patients ’ psychophysiological
processes, yielding multidimensional health bene ﬁts.
Further research revealed a strong association between
intervention outcomes and speci ﬁc psychological factors. In the
aforementioned study combining self-care with self-hypnosis,
researchers explored predictors of fatigue symptom evolution ( 57,
58). Analysis indicated that depression, anxiety, and worry were key
factors predicting fatigue changes. This implies that patients ’ levels
of emotional distress, particularly depression, anxiety, and disease-
related worry, directly in ﬂuence their response to interventions
and the trajectory of symptom improvement, such as fatigue.
This ﬁnding underscores the necessity of fully considering
and actively addressing patients ’ psychological distress when
designing and implementing intervention programs. Improving
emotional states may serve as a crucial pathway to effectively
reduce fatigue and thereby comprehensively enhance quality of
life ( 11, 59). Consequently, interventions targeting psychological
factors constitute a core component for enhancing overall
therapeutic efﬁcacy.
4.3 The integrated mechanism of mind-
body practices on sleep and mental health
Mind-body practices such as mindfulness, meditation, yoga, tai
chi, and qigong demonstrate a unique multidimensional
mechanism for improving sleep quality and psychological distress
in elderly breast cancer patient sb yi n t e g r a t i n gp s y c h o l o g i c a l
regulation with behavioral modi ﬁcation. Their core lies in
regulating emotional and cognitive processes by enhancing
nonjudgmental awareness of present experiences, thereby
indirectly optimizing sleep str ucture and rhythms. Research
indicates that individuals with higher trait mindfulness levels
often report better subjective sleep quality ( 60). This association
may stem from mindfulness-facilitated emotional regulation.
Speciﬁcally, mindfulness disrupts the vicious cycle linking stress
to sleep disturbances by reducing rumination, repetitively dwelling
on negative emotions in a passive manner ( 61). A study of
healthcare workers found that both trait and state mindfulness
promote sleep health by decreasing rumination and negative affect,
with beneﬁts primarily manifesting in subjective sleep dimensions.
This suggests that mind-body practices ﬁrst facilitate
psychological decoupling from daytime emotional stress, creating
a tranquil mental environment conducive to nighttime sleep.
At the neurophysiological level, the sleep-improving effects of
mind-body practices may manifest in speci ﬁc EEG characteristics.
Research indicates that higher trait mindfulness correlates
positively with the percentage of rapid eye movement (REM)
FIGURE 1
Mechanisms by which aerobic exercise improves sleep quality and psychological health in older breast cancer patients.
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org07
sleep stages and is associated with lower high-frequency EEG
activity during both REM and non-REM (NREM) periods ( 62).
REM sleep is crucial for emotional processing, while high-frequency
activity during NREM sleep is often regarded as a marker of
cognitive hyperarousal. Thus, mind-body practices may promote
optimal emotional regulation by enhancing REM sleep function
while suppressing NREM hyperarousal, thereby consolidating sleep
and alleviating psychological distress through neural mechanisms
(62). Furthermore, studies comparing mindfulness therapy with
conventional sleep hygiene education reveal differing effects on
sleep macrostructure despite both improving self-reported sleep
quality: Mindfulness intervention signiﬁ cantly increased N2 stage
sleep, whereas sleep hygiene education increased N3 stage sleep
(63). This suggests mindfulnes s may improve sleep through
mechanisms distinct from traditio n a lb e h a v i o r a li n t e r v e n t i o n s ,
focusing more on in ﬂuencing speci ﬁc sleep stages via
psychological regulation.
Beyond direct sleep regulation, mind-body practices
comprehensively improve patients ’ physical and mental states by
promoting cognitive recovery and enhancing overall quality of life.
Mindfulness training enhances in dividual focus and reduces task-
irrelevant mind wandering (64). Sleep distress has been identi ﬁed as
a trigger for mind wandering, and m ind-body practices may reduce
this cognitive interference by improving sleep ( 64). Such cognitive
enhancement is particularly crucial for cancer patients. A pre-
rehabilitation study involving bre ast cancer surgery patients found
that those receiving mind-body pre-rehabilitation interventions
demonstrated signiﬁcantly greater cognitive improvements compared
to the exercise pre-rehabilitation group (65). Concurrently, mind-body
practices effectively reduce anxiety, depression, and stress levels (65),
potentially through enhanced psychological resilience. Research
conﬁrms that psychological resilience mediates the relationship
between mindfulness levels and sleep quality (66). Through practice,
patients cultivate the ability to approach disease-related stress and
physical discomfort with acceptance and non-judgment, thereby
strengthening their psychological resilience. This resilience buffers the
negative impact of stress on sleep andmood, ultimately enhancing their
quality of life (67). This chain reaction from psychological regulation to
behavioral adaptation to physiological improvement, constitutes the
core mechanism underlying the comprehensive therapeutic effects of
mind-body exercises on sleep and psychological distress in elderly
breast cancer patients, as summarized inFigure 2.
5 Comparison of therapeutic effects
between aerobic exercise and mind-
body practices
5.1 Comparison of effects on sleep quality
A comparative overview of the distinct mechanisms by which
aerobic exercise and mind-body practices exert their effects on sleep
and psychological outcomes is presented in Figure 3 .A e r o b i c
exercise demonstrates signi ﬁcant ef ﬁcacy in improving sleep
q u a l i t ya m o n ge l d e r l yb r e a s tc a ncer patients, particularly in
enhancing sleep architecture a nd physiological indicators.
Multiple studies indicate that aerobic exercise effectively increases
FIGURE 2
Mechanisms by which mind –body practices improve sleep quality and psychological health in older breast cancer patients.
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org08
sleep efﬁciency (SE) and total sleep time (TST) while reducing sleep
latency (SL). For instance, a randomized controlled trial involving
breast cancer patients found that a 16-week aerobic and resistance
exercise intervention signi ﬁcantly improved Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index (PSQI) scores, with this improvement signi ﬁcantly
correlated with reduced insulin resistance ( 8). Additionally, another
study demonstrated that aerobic exercise further optimizes sleep
q u a l i t yb yr e g u l a t i n gc o r t i s o llevels and enhancing autonomic
nervous system function ( 68). These physiological improvements
were not only statistically signiﬁ cant but also demonstrated high
sustainability in clinical practice, providing a reliable non-
pharmacological intervention for long-term sleep management in
elderly breast cancer patients.
In contrast, mind-body practices show greater ef ﬁcacy in
improving sleep latency and sleep maintenance, particularly
beneﬁting patients with psychological distress. A study on yoga-
based rehabilitation training for breast cancer patients found that a
12-week intervention signi ﬁcantly reduced PSQI scores and
improved sleep quality throug h breathing regulation and
relaxation techniques ( 69). Another systematic review on
traditional Chinese exercises also indicated that such
interventions signi ﬁcantly enhance sleep quality in speciﬁ c
populations, particularly by optimizing sleep architecture while
alleviating anxiety and depressive symptoms ( 70). Notably, the
advantage of mind-body practices lies in their multimodal
intervention characteristics, addressing both psychological and
physiological dimensions of sleep disorders. This offers a more
comprehensive treatment appr oach for elderly breast cancer
patients experiencing psychological distress.
In summary, aerobic exercise and mind-body practices each
have distinct strengths in improving sleep quality. Aerobic exercise
is more suitable for patients requiring signiﬁ cant improvements in
sleep architecture and physiological indicators, while mind-body
practices are better suited for those experiencing psychological
distress or dif ﬁculty maintaining sleep. In clinical practice,
personalized intervention plans can be selected based on patients ’
speciﬁc symptoms and preferences.
5.2 Comparison of ef ﬁcacy in alleviating
psychological distress
Mind-body exercises demonstrate unique advantages in
improving psychological distress among elderly breast cancer
patients. Multiple studies indi cate that such interventions,
through targeted emotion regulation techniques and cognitive-
behavioral adjustment strategies, can signi ﬁcantly reduce patients ’
depressive and anxiety symptoms ( 71). Long-term follow-up data
from the OptiTrain trial revealed that patients who participated in
mind-body exercises maintained lower emotional symptom burden
12 months after chemotherapy completion. Improvements were
particularly pronounced in core symptoms such as feeling sad (ES =
-0.44) and irritability (ES = -0.44). This sustained psychological
beneﬁt may stem from mind-body exercises fostering patients ’
cognitive restructuring abilities, enabling them to better cope with
disease and treatment-related stress. An online intervention study
(OPaCT) targeting breast cancer patients during chemotherapy
further con ﬁrmed that mind-body interventions combined with
psychological support signi ﬁcantly improved psychological needs
scores and reduced unmet psychological care needs ( 72).
Additionally, mindfulness in terventions have been shown to
effectively alleviate psychological distress in breast cancer patients
by enhancing emotional regulation and reducing rumination ( 73).
FIGURE 3
Comparative mechanisms of aerobic exercise versus mind –body practices on sleep and psychological outcomes in older breast cancer patients.
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org09
This intervention is particularly suitable for elderly patients due to
its moderate intensity and emphasis on self-acceptance, which aids
in establishing long-term psychological adaptation mechanisms.
Aerobic exercise exerts comprehensive stress-relieving effects
through dual physiological and psychological pathways. Research
indicates that regular aerobic exercise modulates hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis function and lowers cortisol levels, thereby
reducing stress responses ( 9). Concurrently, exercise-induced
endorphin release generates natural euphoria and improves
emotional states. In the OptiTrain trial, patients in the aerobic
exercise group demonstrated signi ﬁcant improvements in
emotional symptoms during chemotherapy, including reductions
in feeling sad (ES = -0.56) and irritability (ES = -0.31) ( 71). Notably,
the efﬁcacy of aerobic exercise in alleviating psychological distress
correlates with exercise intensity: with moderate-intensity (65-85%
VO2max) interval training demonstrating optimal mood regulation
effects ( 9). Furthermore, group exercise formats provide social
support, further enhancing psychological bene ﬁts. The Neo-train
trial found that breast cancer patients engaging in aerobic exercise
not only experienced reduced ps ychological distress but also
signiﬁcantly improved treatment tolerance, manifested as higher
relative dose intensity and shorter hospital stays ( 74). This
characteristic of comprehe nsive mind-body improvement
positions aerobic exercise as a mu ltifaceted intervention for
alleviating psychological distress.
In comparison, mind-body practices are more targeted toward
emotional regulation and cognitive restructuring, particularly suited
for patients with pronounced cognitive distortions or emotional
regulation dif ﬁculties ( 73). Aerobic exercise, however, produces
broader stress-relieving effects through diverse mechanisms such
as neuroendocrine regulation and social interaction ( 9, 71). Clinical
selection should consider indiv idual patient ch aracteristics,
including physical functional status, psychological symptom
proﬁles, and preferences. When necessary, combining both
approaches may yield synergistic effects.
5.3 Adherence and safety analysis of
interventions
Aerobic exercise demonstrated good adherence among elderly
breast cancer patients; however, its high physical demands may
limit participation for some older adults. Multiple studies indicate
that aerobic exercise interventions typically require patients to
possess a certain baseline level of physical ﬁtness, including
cardiorespiratory endurance and muscular strength, which may
pose challenges for elderly patients —particularly those with
comorbid chronic conditions ( 75). For instance, the high-
intensity aerobic exercise protocol in the ATOPE trial, while
demonstrating preventive effects against cardiac toxicity, required
patients to complete 12 –18 training sessions prior to treatment, a
commitment that may be dif ﬁcult for frail elderly patients to
sustain ( 75).
Adherence is in ﬂuenced by multiple factors including physical
ﬁtness levels, facility accessibility, and supervision models.
Regarding facilities, the requirement to travel to dedicated
locations for training may increase patients ’ transportation
burden and time costs, posing barriers to consistent participation.
Concerning supervision models, the EXERT-BC study indicates
that while dose-escalating resistance training protocols demonstrate
good safety in breast cancer survivors, the execution of high-
intensity compound movements necessitates professional
supervision, potentially lim iting their implementation in
community settings ( 76). Notably, remote supervision models
may mitigate this issue —online resistance training delivered
during the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated attendance rates
of 86%–91%, signiﬁcantly higher than the 80%–82% observed in in-
person classes ( 77), suggesting technology-assisted approaches
could enhance accessibility and adherence among elderly patients.
Adherence is in ﬂuenced by multiple factors including physical
ﬁtness levels, facility accessibility, and supervision models.
Regarding facilities, the requirement to travel to dedicated
locations for training may increase patients ’ transportation
burden and time costs, posing barriers to consistent participation.
Concerning supervision models, the EXERT-BC study indicates
that while dose-escalating resistance training protocols demonstrate
good safety in breast cancer survivors, the execution of high-
intensity compound movements necessitates professional
supervision, potentially lim iting their implementation in
community settings ( 76). Notably, remote supervision models
may mitigate this issue —online resistance training delivered
during the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated attendance rates
of 86%–91%, signiﬁcantly higher than the 80%–82% observed in in-
person classes ( 77), suggesting technology-assisted approaches
could enhance accessibility and adherence among elderly patients.
Regarding safety, aerobic exercise is generally safe under
standardized guidance and app ropriate supervision, though
potential risks warrant attention. Older adults may experience
increased risks of musculoskeletal injuries, cardiovascular events,
or falls due to inappropriate exercise intensity, improper form, or
poorly managed underlying conditions. Therefore, comprehensive
pre-exercise assessments, professional supervision during sessions,
and post-exercise monitoring of outcomes are critical for
ensuring safety.
In contrast, mind-body practices offer greater safety and
convenience for home implementation. The QMBE (Qigong
Mind-Body Exercise) study fou nd no serious adverse events
reported among eighteen breast cancer survivors after a 12-week
intervention, with 80% maintaining high adherence ( 78). This low-
intensity, self-regulated nature makes it particularly suitable for
elderly patients with physical limitations, in terms of adherence, the
home-based feasibility of mind-body exercises is a signi ﬁcant
advantage. In the Guolin Qigong trial, patients achieved
signiﬁcant improvements in fatigue and sleep quality by attending
weekly group sessions combined with home practice, with 91%
completing follow-up assessments ( 79 ). Furthermore, the
MAMA_MOVE Gaia project found that group mind-body
exercise classes were not only highly safe but also stabilized
patients ’ post-treatment quality of life scores, with 54% of
participants attending over 70% of sessions ( 80 ). This
combination of social support and low physical exertion may be
key factors explaining why mind-body exercises demonstrate
superior adherence compared to aerobic exercise in older adults
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org10
(81). Notably, the Fit2ThriveMB program for metastatic breast
cancer patients further demonst rated that personalized mind-
body interventions using mobi le health technology, which
combined Fitbit monitoring and weekly guidance, achieved a
92.7% device wear rate and 53.1% daily step goal attainment rate,
with no related adverse events ( 82). This offers novel insights for
home-based rehabilitation.
In terms of safety, mind-body exercises rarely cause serious
adverse events due to their low-intensity, low-impact nature.
Common side effects are typically mild muscle soreness or
fatigue, which usually resolve spontaneously with rest. For elderly
patients with osteoporosis, joint disorders, or balance impairments,
modiﬁed forms such as seated Tai Chi or simpli ﬁed yoga can
further reduce risks.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a three-dimensional
feasibility-safety-effectivenes s evaluation framework for elderly
breast cancer patients to guide the selection and individualized
adjustment of intervention programs in clinical practice.
The feasibility dimension assesses the acceptability and
accessibility of intervention programs within the target
population, whether special equipment or facilities are required,
w h e t h e ri m p l e m e n t a t i o ni sf e a s i b l ei nah o m ee n v i r o n m e n t ,
whether professional supervision is necessary, whether physical
limitations of elderly patients are considered, and whether social
support is provided. Within this dimension, mind-body exercises
typically outperform aerobic exe rcise, particularly for elderly
patients with mobility limitations or transportation challenges.
The safety dimension evaluates the risk level of intervention
programs in the elderly population, including risk of exercise-
related injuries, risk of cardiovascular events, risk of falls, and
incidence of adverse events. In this dimension, mind-body
exercises demonstrate clear advantages due to their low-intensity,
low-impact nature, making them especially suitable for elderly
patients with multiple comorbidities or poor functional status.
The effectiveness dimension evaluates the intervention ’s impact
on target symptoms, including: improvement in sleep quality,
reduction in psychological distress, changes in physiological
indicators, and enhancement of functional capacity. In this
dimension, aerobic exercise excels at improving sleep architecture
and metabolic markers, while mind-body practices demonstrate
greater ef ﬁcacy in enhancing subjective sleep perception and
emotional regulation.
In clinical practice, a balanced approach among the three
modalities should be tailored to individual patient characteristics.
For patients with good physical ﬁtness primarily needing sleep
structure and metabolic state improvements, aerobic exercise may
be prioritized, though feasibili ty and safety must be carefully
considered. For those with limited physical capacity primarily
requiring improvements in sub jective sleep perception and
psychological distress, mind-body exercises should be prioritized
due to their clear advantages in feasibility and safety. For patients
with complex functional states, a combined intervention strategy
may be employed, starting with mind-body exercises and gradually
introducing aerobic exercise t o achieve the optimal risk-
beneﬁt balance.
Based on existing evidence, we propose the following practical
recommendations to improve int ervention adherence among
elderly breast cancer patients. First, adopt remote supervision
models, such as video-conference guided group sessions, to
reduce transportation burdens wh ile maintaining professional
guidance ( 77). Second, integrate mobile health technologies,
including wearable devices and mobile applications, to provide
real-time feedback and personalized coaching ( 82). Third,
emphasize social support by enhancing patients ’ sense of social
connection and belonging through group sessions or peer support
groups ( 80). Fourth, offer multiple intervention formats, allowing
patients to select appropriate aerobic or mind-body exercises based
on personal preferences and physical capacity. Finally, adopt a
progressive intervention strategy, starting with low-intensity, short-
duration exercises and gradually increasing intensity and duration
to help patients build con ﬁdence and establish exercise habits.
5.4 Potential synergistic effects of
combined interventions
Previous sections have elucidated the distinct yet
complementary mechanisms by which aerobic exercise and mind-
body practices improve sleep quality and psychological distress in
elderly breast cancer patients. Aerobic exercise primarily acts on
physiological pathways, including hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis regulation, metabolic enhancement, and in ﬂammation
reduction ( 9, 37, 68). In contrast, mind-body practices primarily
inﬂuence psychological and neurocognitive mechanisms, such as
emotional regulation, mindfulness enhancement, and stress
reduction ( 11, 62, 63). This complementary mechanism suggests
that combining these two interventions may yield synergistic effects
exceeding the sum of their individual contributions.
The physiological and psychological pathways targeted by aerobic
exercise and mind-body practices are not mutually exclusive but
interact in complex ways. Aerobic exercise-induced improvements in
sleep architecture and metabolic function may create a more favorable
physiological state, thereby enhancing the effects of mind-body
practices. Conversely, the emotional regulation and stress reduction
capabilities gained through mind-body practices may increase patients’
motivation, self-efﬁcacy, and adherence to aerobic exercise. This
bidirectional promotion suggests combined interventions may yield
additive or even synergistic effects on clinical outcomes.
From a neurobiological perspective, aerobic exercise promotes
neuroplasticity through mechanisms such as upregulation of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor and increased cerebral blood ﬂow (48),
potentially establishing the neural foundation for mind-body
practice’s cognitive and emotional training effects. Mind-body
practice enhances the prefrontal cortex ’s regulatory capacity over
limbic system activity ( 49), potentially optimizing the neural
environment for exercise-induced neuroplastic changes. The
integration of these complementary mechanisms may yield more
pronounced and enduring improvements in sleep quality and
psychological distress.
Although direct evidence for combined aerobic exercise and
mind-body practice interventions in elderly breast cancer patients
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org11
remains limited, preliminary studies in relevant populations
support the potential bene ﬁts of integrated approaches. Knoerl
et al. ( 65) compared exercise-based prehabilitation with mind-
body prehabilitation in women undergoing breast cancer surgery.
Both interventions improved psychological outcomes, but the
mind-body group demonstrated superior cognitive function
enhancement. This suggests different interventions may target
distinct outcome domains, providing theoretical support for
combined approaches.
In the OptiTrain trial ( 71), patients receiving either resistance-
HIIT or aerobic-HIIT demonstrated signi ﬁcantly reduced
emotional symptom burden comp ared to standard care, with
effects persisting at 12-month follow-up. While this trial did not
explicitly test combined aerobic and mind-body exercise
interventions, it demonstrated that different exercise modalities
can produce complementary bene ﬁts across multiple
symptom domains.
Research in non-cancer populations offers additional support.
Studies involving individuals with metabolic syndrome indicate that
combining aerobic exercise with stress reduction techniques yields
greater improvements in metabolic parameters and mental health
than either intervention alone ( 39). Similarly, among older adults
with insomnia, a combined approach integrating physical activity
and mindfulness techniques demonstrated superior sleep outcomes
compared to single interventions ( 63).
Based on the underlying mechanisms and preliminary evidence,
we propose the following models integrating aerobic exercise with
mind-body practices for exploration in future research. Sequential
Intervention Model: In this approach, patients ﬁrst undergo one
intervention followed by another, either in a ﬁxed sequence or
adjusted according to individual characteristics. For instance,
patients with severe anxiety may begin with mind-body practice
to enhance emotional regulation and stress management, gradually
introducing aerobic exercise once psychological stability is achieved.
Conversely, patients primarily presenting with metabolic disorders
may start with aerobic exercise, later incorporating mind-body
practice to address residual psychological symptoms and support
long-term adherence.
Synchronous intervention model delivers both interventions
concurrently within the same timeframe. For instance, patients
might attend two aerobic exercise sessions and two mind-body
practice sessions weekly over 12 –16 weeks. This approach
maximizes synergistic potential but requires careful consideration
of patient burden and scheduling feasibility.
In integrated Intervention model, elements of aerobic exercise
and mind-body practice are integrated into a single session or
program. Examples include mindfulness walking programs
incorporating attention to breathing and bodily sensations during
aerobic activity, or yoga interventions incorporating cardiovascular
components. This integrated approach may enhance adherence by
simplifying program logistics while potentially amplifying
therapeutic effects by simultaneously engaging physiological and
psychological mechanisms.
Stepwise intervention model matches intervention intensity and
complexity to patient response, starting with simpler, lower-
intensity interventions and progressively adding components as
clinically warranted. For instance, patients might begin with a basic
mind-body exercise program, with aerobic exercise added if sleep or
psychological outcomes remain suboptimal after the initial phase.
This personalized approach can optimize resource allocation while
ensuring patients receive intervention intensity appropriate to
their needs.
Future studies should syste matically evaluate the ef ﬁcacy,
feasibility, and optimal implementation strategies of combined
aerobic exercise and mind-body practice interventions in elderly
breast cancer patients. Priority research questions are as follows:
Compared to single interventions, does combining aerobic
exercise with mind-body practice yield superior improvements in
sleep quality and psychological distress? This requires a three-arm
randomized controlled trial comparing the combined intervention
against each monotherapy and a control group. What is the optimal
sequence and timing for combined interventions? Comparative
effectiveness studies should evaluate the relative merits of
sequential, concurrent, and integrated intervention models in
terms of ef ﬁcacy and adherence.Which patient subgroups bene ﬁt
most from combined interventions? Moderator analyses should
investigate whether baseline characteristics predict differential
responses to combined versus single interventions. What
mechanisms underlie synergistic effects? Mediator analyses should
explore whether combined interventions yield bene ﬁts through
additive or interactive effec ts across physiological and
psychological pathways. What is the optimal “dose” for each
intervention component in combined approaches? Dose- ﬁnding
studies should determine the minimum effective dose of aerobic
exercise and mind-body practice required to achieve synergistic
effects while minimizing patient burden.
How can combined interventions be effectively implemented in
clinical practice? Implementation science research should evaluate
strategies for integrating aerobi c exercise-mind-body practice
programs into routine oncology care, including digital delivery
platforms, community-based programs, and step-up care models.
Several practical issues warrant attention when developing
combined interventions for elderly breast cancer patients. First,
patient burden must be carefully managed, as combined
interventions require greater time commitment than single
interventions. Strategies to reduce burden include offering ﬂexible
scheduling, home-based options, and digital delivery platforms.
Second, intervention sequencing should consider patient
preferences and baseline capabilities, some patients may prefer
starting with milder mind-body exercises before progressing to
aerobic exercise. Third, supervision requirements may vary across
interventions, with aerobic exercise typically necessitating more
intensive safety monitoring, particularly in patients with lower
ﬁtness levels or frailty. Fourth, outcome assessments should
capture both intervention-speci ﬁc effects and shared outcomes to
comprehensively describe intervention bene ﬁts.
In summary, the complementary mechanisms between aerobic
exercise and mind-body practices provide a robust theoretical
foundation for exploring combined interventions among elderly
breast cancer patients experi encing sleep disturbances and
psychological distress. Although direct evidence remains limited,
preliminary studies in relevant populations support the potential for
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org12
synergistic effects. Future research should employ rigorous trial
designs to systematically evaluate combined intervention
approaches, focusing on optimal sequencing, dosage, and
implementation strategies. Such studies hold the potential to
establish more effective, personalized rehabilitation protocols that
fully leverage the full potential of non-pharmacological
interventions available to this vulnerable population.
6 Limitations of existing research
6.1 General research design and sample
limitations
Current studies investigating the effects of aerobic exercise and
mind-body practices on improving sleep quality and psychological
distress in elderly breast cancer patients exhibit signi ﬁcant
limitations in research design and sample selection. First, most
studies feature limited sample sizes and lack designs speci ﬁcally
tailored to elderly breast cancer patient populations. For example, a
study investigating exercise adherence among breast cancer patients
undergoing aerobic and resist ance training during or after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy included only 68 participants with an
average age of 52 years, failing to speci ﬁcally focus on the elderly
population ( 79). This indicates existing research has insuf ﬁcient
recruitment and inclusion of adequate numbers of elderly breast
cancer patients, limiting the representativeness and generalizability
of ﬁndings. Small sample sizes make it dif ﬁcult to detect subtle yet
clinically signi ﬁcant effects of interventions, particularly in the
highly heterogeneous elderly po pulation, whose physiological
function, comorbidities, and treatment responses may differ from
younger patients. Therefore, future research requires larger-scale
clinical trials speci ﬁcally designed for elderly breast cancer patients
to provide more targeted evidence.
Second, the number of high-quality randomized controlled
trials remains insuf ﬁcient, and existing studies exhibit signi ﬁcant
variations in intervention duration and intensity, posing challenges
for comparing ef ﬁcacy and drawing de ﬁnitive conclusions. For
example, a mixed-methods randomized controlled trial exploring
the effects of Guolin Qigong on cancer-related fatigue set its
intervention cycle at 12 weeks with a 4-week follow-up period
(75). However, intervention durations across studies range from
weeks to months, and there is a lack of uniform standards for the
frequency, single-session duration, and intensity of exercise or
mind-body practices. This heterogeneity complicates data pooling
and meta-analysis in system atic reviews, hindering the
identiﬁcation of optimal intervention dosages.
The heterogeneity of intervention protocols extends beyond
duration, manifesting more prominently in insuf ﬁcient
standardization of frequency, intensity, intervention formats, and
speciﬁc content descriptions. This heterogeneity poses multiple
challenges for interpreting research ﬁndings and translating them
into clinical practice. First, at t he meta-analysis level, aerobic
exercise intensity ranges widely across studies, single-session
durations for mind-body practices vary from 30 to 90 minutes,
and intervention cycles vary signi ﬁcantly from 4 to 24 weeks. These
inconsistent parameters make direct comparisons between studies
difﬁcult, often resulting in high heterogeneity when pooling data
and thereby reducing the reliability of meta-analysis conclusions.
Second, at the clinical implementation level, the lack of
standardized intervention protocols makes it challenging for
clinicians to determine the most effective dose of intervention for
elderly breast cance rp a t i e n t sa n dt oa c c u r a t e l yr e p l i c a t et h e
interventions used in studies. Notably, intervention descriptions
are often overly brief, for instance, merely mentioning
yoga training without detailing speci ﬁc postures, breathing
techniques, or meditation elements, or describing aerobic exercise
without specifying exercise modalities. This severely limits the
reproducibility of research.
6.2 Structured assessment of evidence
quality
To further enhance the rigor of this systematic review, we
conducted a structured assessment of the evidence quality in the
included studies. Although no meta-analysis was conducted in this
study, evidence quality was qualitatively assessed using the GRADE
framework across ﬁve dimensions: risk of bias, inconsistency,
indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias.
The Cochrane Risk of Bias tool (RoB 2.0) was used to assess risk
of bias across included studies. Overall, study quality was moderate
to high, but common issues included: First, due to the nature of
exercise interventions, most studies could not blind participants,
potentially introducing implementation bias. Second, some studies
failed to explicitly report allocation concealment protocols,
increasing the risk of selection bias. Third, a few studies had high
loss-to-follow-up rates and did not perform intention-to-treat
analyses, potentially affecting r esult reliability. However, most
studies were well-controlled r egarding outcome measurement
blinding and selective reporting, resulting in an overall acceptable
risk of bias.
Using the GRADE framework, we conducted a preliminary
grading of evidence quality fo r primary outcome measures.
Moderate-quality evidence supports aerobic exercise improving
sleep quality. Although multipl e randomized controlled trials
consistently showed improved PSQI scores after aerobic exercise,
such as Normann et al., most studies had methodological
limitations due to lack of participant blinding and primarily
enrolled non-elderly populations, and subjects were
predominantly non-elderly populations. Thus, evidence quality
was downgraded from high to moderate.
Low-quality evidence supports the efﬁcacy of aerobic exercise in
alleviating psychological distress. Studies by Galvao et al. ( 41) and
Talotta et al. ( 40) indicate aerobic exercise reduces anxiety and
depression levels. However, these studies involved prostate cancer
patients and ﬁbromyalgia patients, respectively, limiting their
generalizability to elderly breas t cancer patients. Additionally,
some studies were narrative reviews rather than randomized
controlled trials, resulting in low-quality evidence.
Moderate-quality evidence supports mind-body practices for
improving sleep quality. Randomized controlled trials by Gregoire
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org13
et al. ( 11 )a n dL i ue ta l .( 69 ), demonstrated signi ﬁcant
improvements in PSQI scores fo llowing mind-body exercises,
with moderate effect sizes. However, concerns exist regarding lack
of participant blinding and high heterogeneity in intervention
protocols. Nevertheless, consistent effect directions and adequate
sample sizes led to a moderate-quality rating.
There is moderate-quality evidence supporting the ef ﬁcacy of
mind-body practices in alleviating psychological distress. Multiple
RCTs demonstrated that improvements in anxiety and depression
from mind-body practices persisted at 12-month follow-up, with
moderate effect sizes. Despite some risk of bias and indirectness
concerns, overall evidence quality was rated moderate.
Regarding comparisons of adherence and safety, only low-
quality evidence currently ex ists. Comparative studies on
intervention adherence and safety, Winters-Stone et al. ( 77) and
Osypiuk et al. ( 78) were primarily observational or exploratory
trials lacking randomized designs, limiting the strength of
conclusions. Furthermore, high heterogeneity in outcome
measures for adherence and safety across studies precluded
quantitative synthesis, resulting in low evidence quality.
Overall, existing evidence supports the effectiveness of aerobic
exercise and mind-body practices in improving sleep quality and
alleviating psychological dist ress among elderly breast cancer
patients. However, evidence quality is predominantly low to
moderate, primarily constrained by indirectness of study
populations, lack of blinding in intervention implementation, and
heterogeneity of intervention protocols. Future research requires
more high-quality randomiz ed controlled trials speci ﬁcally
targeting elderly breast cancer patients, strictly adhering to the
CONSORT statement and GRADE framework requirements to
enhance the reliability and clinical applicability of the evidence.
6.3 Research gaps and future directions in
aerobic exercise speci ﬁcity
There is insuf ﬁcient evidence to determine the optimal dose of
aerobic exercise including frequency, intensity, duration, and
intervention cycle for maximizing improvements in sleep and
psychological symptoms among elderly breast cancer patients.
Most studies employ arbitrarily set exercise parameters without
systematically comparing the effects of different intensities or
durations. Future studies should employ multi-arm randomized
controlled trial designs to compare the effects of different exercise
intensities and durations. This approach will establish clear dose-
response curves, providing precise evidence for clinical prescribing.
Existing studies predominantly include relatively young breast
cancer patients with good physical ﬁtness, with insuf ﬁcient
attention to how subgroups exhibiting typical geriatric
characteristics, such as frai lty, sarcopenia, and multiple
comorbidities adapt. Data on how elderly patients with varying
baseline functional status adapt to aerobic exercise interventions
remain scarce. Future studies should speci ﬁcally recruit elderly
breast cancer patients, incorporate geriatric-speci ﬁci n d i c a t o r s
such as frailty assessment, activities of daily living capacity, and
fall risk, and explore strategies for developing individualized
exercise prescriptions based on baseline functional strati ﬁcation.
Most studies have short follow-up periods, lacking in-depth
exploration of aerobic exercise long-term effects and behavioral
maintenance mechanisms after intervention cessation. Research
indicates that while most patients continue exercising after
intervention, a signi ﬁcant proportion discontinue training
immediately or within months. Discontinuation reasons include
practical issues such as insuf ﬁcient time and excessive distance to
training venues. This suggests future studies should extend follow-
up periods to 12 months or longer and employ mixed-methods
approaches to explore psychosocial factors in ﬂuencing long-term
exercise adherence, such as self-ef ﬁcacy, social support, and
perceived barriers to exercise.
Future aerobic exercise-relat ed studies should adopt more
rigorous methodological designs. Speci ﬁc recommendations are as
follows: Conducting multicenter randomized controlled trials with
a sample size of at least 200 participants to ensure suf ﬁcient
statistical power for detecting clinically meaningful effects and
supporting subgroup analyse. Employing objective sleep
measurement tools, such as actigraphs and polysomnography, to
complement subjective sleep questionnaires and provide a more
comprehensive assessment of sleep architecture. Extending follow-
up periods to at least 6 months, ideally reaching 12 months or
longer, to evaluate the sustainability of intervention effects and
identify factors in ﬂuencing long-term adherence. Incorporating
geriatric-speci ﬁc outcome measures, including frailty indices,
cognitive function assessments, physical performance tests, and
quality-of-life scales tailored for older adults, to comprehensively
capture intervention bene ﬁts in elderly patients. Implementing
stratiﬁed randomization based on key patient characteristics to
ensure balanced comparability between groups and facilitate more
reﬁned subgroup analyses.
6.4 Research gaps and future directions in
the study of mind-body practice speci ﬁcity
Mind-body practices such as yoga, tai chi, qigong, and
mindfulness meditation exhibit signi ﬁcant differences in
movement patterns, breathing techniques, and elements of mental
focus. However, the current lack of head-to-head comparative
research prevents determining which modality offers the greatest
advantage for speci ﬁc symptoms in elderly breast cancer patients,
such as sleep disorders, anxiety, and depression. Future studies
should conduct multi-arm randomized controlled trials to directly
compare the intervention effects of different mind-body practice
forms and explore their potential speci ﬁc mechanisms of action.
Existing studies exhibit considerable variability in intervention
frequency, session duration, an d total intervention duration.
Furthermore, descriptions of i ntervention content are often
insuf ﬁciently detailed, limiting re search reproducibility and
clinical translation. Future studies should adhere to the TIDieR
guidelines for detailed intervention reporting, explore the minimum
effective dose—the lowest intervention intensity yielding clinically
meaningful improvements, and develop modi ﬁed mind-body
practices suitable for elderly patients with mobility limitations.
Although existing studies suggest mind-body practices may
exert effects through pathways such as autonomic nervous system
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org14
regulation, psychological resi lience enhancement, and sleep
structure optimization, systematic mechanism research is lacking,
particularly comprehensive evaluations involving neuroimaging,
neuroendocrine, and immunolo gical markers. Future studies
should employ multimodal assessment tools, including functional
MRI, cortisol circadian rhythm analysis, and inﬂammatory cytokine
proﬁling, to elucidate the biological basis underlying mind-body
exercises’ effects on improving sleep and psychological distress in
elderly breast cancer patients.
Existing research on mind-body practices predominantly
originates from Western contexts such as yoga and mindfulness
interventions, with relatively limited studies on Eastern traditional
practices like Tai Chi and Qigong, and a lack of cross-cultural
comparisons. Future research should focus on mind-body practices
grounded in Eastern cultural contexts, exploring their acceptability
and efﬁcacy among elderly breast cancer patients in local settings.
Concurrently, the application value of digital platforms, such as
mobile applications and remote live-streamed interventions, should
be evaluated for promoting mind- body practices, particularly
among elderly populations with mobility limitations.
To advance research in this ﬁeld, future studies on mind-body
practices should incorporate the following methodological
recommendations. Designing multi-arm randomized controlled
trials with a minimum sample size of 200 participants to enable
direct comparisons between different mind-body practice
modalities, and against active control groups. Employing
objective sleep measurement too ls, including actigraphs and
polysomnography, to capture both subjective and objective
dimensions of sleep quality and identify intervention-speci ﬁc
effects on sleep architecture.Establishing 6- to 12-month follow-
up periods to assess intervention sustainability and identify factors
associated with long-term practice maintenance, Incorporating age-
speciﬁc outcome measures, such as cognitive function tests, physical
performance assessments, frailty indices, and social engagement
scales, to comprehensively capture the multidimensional bene ﬁts of
mind-body practices in older adults, including mechanism-
assessment indicators, including neuroimaging, stress and
in ﬂammation biomarkers, and psychological constructs
to elucidate pathways of actio n, evaluate the feasibility
and effectiveness of digital del ivery platforms in enhancing
accessibility and adherence among homebound or mobility-
impaired elderly patients.
6.5 Summary of future research directions
In summary, future research requires designing larger-scale,
methodologically rigorous clinical trials speciﬁcally targeting elderly
breast cancer patients to provide more targeted evidence. Beyond
addressing common methodologica l issues, researchers should
prioritize intervention-speci ﬁc research questions: establishing
dose-response relationships for aerobic exercise while determining
the relative ef ﬁcacy of different mind-body practice modalities. For
both intervention types, the following design elements should be
prioritized, sample size ≥200 to ensure suf ﬁcient statistical power,
incorporation of objective slee p measurement tools alongside
subjective questionnaires, follow-up periods of at least 6 –12
months to assess long-term effects, incorporating geriatric-speci ﬁc
outcome measures, conducting strati ﬁed randomization based on
key patient characteristics, pr oviding detailed intervention
reporting following CONSORT and TIDieR guidelines.
Additionally, exploring so ciodemographic factors in ﬂuencing
long-term maintenance, such as age, education level, and marital
status is crucial for enhancing i ntervention sustainability.
Integrating digital health technologies may offer novel pathways
to enhance intervention accessibility and adherence, particularly for
mobility-impaired older adults. These research advances will propel
the development of evidence-based precision rehabilitation
programs, ultimately driving a paradigm shift from symptom
management to holistic health promotion.
7 Perspectives
Rehabilitation management for elderly breast cancer patients
presents a multidimensional, comprehensive clinical challenge.
Sleep disorders and psychological distress, as common comorbid
symptoms, signiﬁcantly impair treatment adherence and quality of
life. Existing evidence indicates that aerobic exercise and mind-body
practices, as non-pharmacological interventions, demonstrate
unique value and complementarity in improving health outcomes
for this speci ﬁc population.
At the mechanism level, aerobic exercise regulates
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function and promotes
melatonin secretion, thereby improving sleep structure
abnormalities and metabolic disorders. This physiological
regulation is particularly crucial for elderly patients with
metabolic syndrome. In contrast, mind-body practices activate the
prefrontal cortex-limbic system neural circuitry to reduce
sympathetic nervous system activity, thereby more effectively
alleviating anxiety, depressi on, and chemotherapy-related
cognitive impairment. This ne uropsychological regulatory
mechanism explains why mind-body practices excel in improving
subjective sleep quality.
Given the signi ﬁcant heterogeneity in physiological function,
psychological status, and comorbidities among elderly breast cancer
patients, clinical practice should develop strati ﬁed, personalized
intervention plans based on individual patient characteristics.
Stratiﬁed Recommendations Based on Physical Fitness, for
patients with good physical ﬁtness and strong aerobic capacity,
moderate-intensity aerobic exercise is recommended as a priority.
This includes brisk walking, stationary cycling, or swimming 3
times per week for 30 –45 minutes per session. Such activities
effectively improve cardiopulmonary function, metabolic status,
and sleep architecture.
For individuals with poor physical ﬁtness and limited aerobic
capacity, a strategy combining low-intensity aerobic exercise with
mind-body practices is recommended. Speci ﬁcally, begin with low-
intensity home walking, for instance, 3 sessions per week, 20
minutes per session, gradually transitioning to seated Tai Chi,
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org15
simpliﬁed yoga, or mindful breathing exercises. This combined
approach mitigates exercise-related risks while improving sleep and
mental well-being through mind-body regulation mechanisms.
Tiered Recommendations Base d on Psychological Distress
Characteristics, for individuals primarily experiencing anxiety or
worry, mind-body practices are prioritized, particularly
mindfulness-based stress reduction, yoga, or tai chi. These
interventions signi ﬁcantly alleviate anxiety symptoms by
enhancing emotional regulation and reducing rumination.
Recommend attending 2 –3 group sessions weekly, supplemented
by 15–20 minutes of daily home practice. For individuals primarily
experiencing low mood or lack of motivation, prioritize aerobic
exercise. This promotes natural mood elevation by releasing
endorphins and regulating neuroendocrine function. 3 weekly
sessions of moderate-intensity outdoor brisk walking or group
aerobic classes to gain dual bene ﬁts from both exercise and
social interaction.
For individuals with pronounced post-traumatic stress
reactions or disease-related anxieties, mind-body practices serve
as ﬁrst-line interventions, especially when integrated with self-
hypnosis or mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Such
approaches help reframe perceptions of illness and symptoms,
alleviating psychological burdens.
Tiered Recommendations Based on Comorbid Conditions, for
individuals with metabolic conditions such as cardiovascular
disease or diabetes, aerobic exercise should be prioritized as it
simultaneously improves metabolic markers and cardiovascular
function. Start at low intensity under professional guidance,
gradually progressing to modera te intensity while monitoring
physical responses during exercise. For individuals experiencing
joint pain, mobility limitations, or impaired balance, home-based
mind-body exercises such as seated Tai Chi, chair yoga, or mindful
breathing practices are recommended. These interventions offer
high safety pro ﬁles and can alleviate pain-related distress by
enhancing proprioceptive awareness and body consciousness. For
individuals with multiple comorbidities and complex functional
status, adopt a progressive intervention strategy characterized by
low intensity, short duration, and high frequency. Begin with 2 –3
sessions per week of 15-minute mind-body exercises, gradually
increasing duration and frequency. Introduce low-intensity aerobic
exercise as tolerated.
Tiered Recommendations Based on Treatment Phase, for
individuals undergoing adjuvant therapies, interventions centered
on mind-body practices are recommended due to their controllable
intensity and adaptability. Mindful breathing, guided imagery, and
gentle stretching exercises help alleviate treatment-related side effects
and improve sleep quality. For patients who have completed primary
treatment and entered the recovery phase, aerobic exercise and
resistance training can be gradually introduced to promote overall
functional recovery. A combined model of mind-body exercises and
aerobic exercise is recommended, such as two yoga sessions per week
combined with two brisk walking sessions.
Regardless of the intervention strategy chosen, the following key
points should be observed in clinical practice: First, intervention
intensity should follow the principle of low-to-high, step-by-step
progression, particularly for elderly patients with long-term
physical inactivity. Second, group intervention formats provide
valuable social support, enhancing compliance and long-term
adherence. Third, digital intervention platforms offer viable
alternatives for mobility-impa ired individuals and should be
considered in clinical practice . Finally, regularly assessing
symptom changes and intervention tolerance to promptly adjust
protocols is key to achieving personalized, precision rehabilitation.
Author contributions
CC: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. WL:
Writing – review & editing. XL: Superv ision, Validation, Writing –
review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declared that ﬁnancial support was not received
for this work and/or its publication.
Conﬂict of interest
The author(s) declared that this work was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential con ﬂict of interest.
Generative AI statement
The author(s) declared that generative AI was not used in the
creation of this manuscript.
Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside ﬁgures in this
article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of arti ﬁcial
intelligence and reasonable e fforts have been made to ensure
accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If
you identify any issues, please contact us.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org16
References
1. Boivin MJ, Aaron GP, Felt NG, Shamoun L. Preliminary study on the effects of
treatment for breast cancer: immunological markers as they relate to quality of life and
neuropsychological performance. BMC Womens Health . (2020) 20:109. doi: 10.1186/
s12905-020-00971-1
2. Kim J, Harper A, McCormack V, Sung H, Houssami N, Morgan E, et al. Global
patterns and trends in breast cancer incidence and mortality across 185 countries. Nat
Med. (2025) 31:1154 –62. doi: 10.1038/s41591-025-03502-3
3. Ratcliff CG, Zepeda SG, Hall MH, Tullos EA, Fowler S, Chaoul A, et al. Patient
characteristics associated with sleep disturbance in breast cancer survivors. Support
Care Cancer . (2021) 29:2601 –11. doi: 10.1007/s00520-020-05777-3
4. Ganz PA, Bower JE, Partridge AH, Wolff AC, Thorner ED, Joffe H, et al. Screening
for depression in younger breast cancer survivors: outcomes from use of the 9-item
patient health questionnaire. JNCI Cancer Spectr. (2021) 5. doi: 10.1093/jncics/pkab017
5. Renna ME, Shrout MR, Madison AA, Lustberg M, Povoski SP, Agnese DM, et al.
Distress Disorder Histories Relate to Greater Physical Symptoms among Breast Cancer
Patients and Survivors: Findings across the Cancer Trajectory. Int J Behav Med . (2023)
30:463–72. doi: 10.1007/s12529-022-10115-4
6. Pagliuca M, Havas J, Thomas E, Drouet Y, Soldato D, Franzoi MA, et al. Long-term
behavioral symptom clusters among surv ivors of early-stage breast cancer:
development and validation of a predictive model. J Natl Cancer Inst . (2025) 117:89 –
102. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djae222
7. Liu Y, Su Y, Bai L, Yang A, Chen S. The mediating effect of psychosomatic
symptoms between physical activity and cognitive function among breast cancer
patients: A path analysis. Eur J Oncol Nurs . (2025) 74:102761. doi: 10.1016/
j.ejon.2024.102761
8. Dev R, Fortuno ES3rd, Amaram-Davila JS, Haider A, Bruera E. Bene ﬁts and risks of
off-label olanzapine use for symptom management in cancer patients-a case report.
Ann Palliat Med . (2023) 12:600 –6. doi: 10.21037/apm-22-1167
9. Normann AJ, Kang DW, Christopher CN, Norris MK, Dieli-Conwright CM.
Improved sleep quality is associated with reduced insulin resistance in cancer
survivors undertaking circuit, interval-based exercise. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev. (2022) 31:1509 –10. doi: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-22-0472
10. Sagarra-Romero L, Val-Ferrer R, Fernandez-Garcia AI, Ramon-Arbues E. Effects
of an online home-based exercise intervention on sleep quality in breast cancer patients
during the covid-19 lockdown: A pilot study. Support Care Cancer . (2025) 33:650.
doi: 10.1007/s00520-025-09710-4
11. Gregoire C, Faymonville ME, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Charland-Verville V, Jerusalem
G, Willems S, et al. Effects of an intervention combining self-care and self-hypnosis on
fatigue and associated symptoms in post-treatment cancer patients: A randomized-
controlled trial. Psychooncology. (2020) 29:1165 –73. doi: 10.1002/pon.5395
12. Greeley KM, Rash J, Tulk J, Savard J, Seal M, Urquhart R, et al. Impact and
mechanisms of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia on fatigue among cancer
survivors: A secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Sleep. (2025) 48.
doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsaf014
13. Geese F, Schmitt KU. Interprofessional collaboration in complex patient care
transition: A qualitative multi-perspective analysis. Healthcare (Basel) . (2023) 11.
doi: 10.3390/healthcare11030359
14. American Diabetes Association Professional Practice C. 5. Facilitating behavior
change and well-being to improve health outcomes: standards of medical care in
diabetes-2022. Diabetes Care . (2022) 45:S60 –82. doi: 10.2337/dc22-S005
15. Choi E, Henneghan AM. Comparing fatigue, loneliness, daytime sleepiness, and
stress in younger and older breast cancer survivors: A cross-sectional analysis. Clin J
Oncol Nurs . (2022) 26:155 –64. doi: 10.1188/22.CJON.155-164
16. Carson EK, Dhillon HM, Vardy JL, Brown C, Mok C, Panambalana A, et al. The
impact of breast cancer treatment on sleep disturbance: A systematic review. Breast
Cancer Res Treat . (2025) 215:48. doi: 10.1007/s10549-025-07835-y
17. Duran-Gomez N, Martin-Parrilla MA, Lopez-Jurado CF, Montanero-Fernandez J,
Nadal-Delgado M, Caceres MC. The need for comprehensive sleep disturbances
assessment and managemen t in breast cancer care. Sci Rep . (2025) 15:21235.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-05315-3
18. Weng YP, Hong RM, Chen VC, Tsai CJ, Yeh DC, Fang YH. Sleep quality and
related factors in patients with breast cancer: A cross-sectional study in Taiwan. Cancer
Manag Res . (2021) 13:4725 –33. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S302966
19. Peoples AR, Pigeon WR, Li D, Garland SN, Perlis ML, Inglis JE, et al. Association
between pretreatment sleep disturbance and radiation therapy-induced pain in 573
women with breast cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage . (2021) 61:254 –61. doi: 10.1016/
j.jpainsymman.2020.07.041
20. Alsharif F, Shibily F, Almutairi W, Alsaedi A, Alsubaie T, Alshuaibi B, et al. Fatigue
and Sleep Disturbance among Breast Cancer Patients during Treatment in Saudi
Arabia. Nurs Res Pract . (2022) 2022:1832346. doi: 10.1155/2022/1832346
21. Li D, Zheng Z, Huang Q, Zhang W, Hu P, Yuan C, et al. Patterns of psychological
distress of chinese elderly cancer patients: A latent pro ﬁle analysis. Nurs Open. (2025)
12:e70222. doi: 10.1002/nop2.70222
22. Zeilinger EL, Oppenauer C, Knefel M, Kantor V, Schneckenreiter C, Lubowitzki S,
et al. Prevalence of anxiety and depression in people with different types of cancer or
haematologic Malignancies: A cross-sectional study. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. (2022) 31:
e74. doi: 10.1017/S2045796022000592
23. Pellini F, Mirandola S, Granuzzo E, Urbani S, Piccinni Leopardi G, Pollini GP.
Italian men tested for brca1/2 mutation: psychological distress during 6-month follow-
up. J Oncol . (2020) 2020:3987935. doi: 10.1155/2020/3987935
24. Caparso C, Appel J, Benkert R. Dying concerns in young parents with advanced
cancer (Pwac): A scoping review. Palliat Support Care . (2021) 19:93–102. doi: 10.1017/
S1478951520000309
25. Molaeipour L, Jabarbeigi R, Lari T, Osooli M, Jafari E. Gaming disorder and
psychological distress among Iranian adolescents: the mediating role of sleep hygiene.
BMC Public Health . (2025) 25:838. doi: 10.1186/s12889-025-22040-8
26. Jiang HF, Hu W, Jin TT, Shan HL, Zhu T, Xu JJ, et al. Genetic links between
psychological distress, sleep disorders, and sepsis risk: A mendelian randomization
study. Int J Clin Pharm . (2025) 47:1354 –64. doi: 10.1007/s11096-025-01931-1
27. Leader G, Glynn C, Kirkpatrick B, Chen JL, O ’Suilleabhain PS, Mannion A.
Familial sleep and autism spectrum disorder: A pilot actigraphy study of sleep quality,
quality of life and psychological distress. Ir J Psychol Med . (2022) 39:261 –71.
doi: 10.1017/ipm.2021.24
28. Li J, Zhang YY, Cong XY, Ren SR, Tu XM, Wu JF. 5-min mindfulness audio
induction alleviates psychological distress and sleep disorders in patients with covid-19.
World J Clin cases . (2022) 10:576 –84. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i2.576
29. Wang Y, Sun K, Zhang W, Zhang H, Wang C. Pain and psychological distress:
effect of microvascular decompression on sleep disorders and obsessions in trigeminal
neuralgia. J Neurol Surg B Skull Base . (2021) 82:e285–e94. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-3402040
30. Gilhooley E, O ’Grady C, Roche D, Mahon JM, Hambly R, Kelly A, et al. High levels
of psychological distress, sleep disturbance, and alcohol use disorder in adults with
atopic dermatitis. Dermatitis. (2021) 32:S33 –S8. doi: 10.1097/DER.0000000000000687
31. Wang J, Zheng Z, Tang Y, Zhang R, Lu Q, Wang B, et al. Psychological distress and
its in ﬂuencing factors among psychiatric nurses in China: A cross-sectional study.
Front Psychiatry . (2022) 13:948786. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.948786
32. Sherrey J, Biggs S, Dorrian J, Martin J, Gold M, Kennedy D, et al. Allergic disease,
sleep problems, and psychological distress in children recruited from the general
community. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol . (2022) 129:366 –72. doi: 10.1016/
j.anai.2022.05.008
33. Fang X, Wan J, Lin J, Lu X, Wang J, Long Y, et al. Psychological distress and sleep
disturbance as mediators in the association between bodily pain and painful
temporomandibular disorders. J Oral Rehabil . (2025). doi: 10.1111/joor.70101
34. Kuo HI, Hsieh MH, Lin YT, Kuo MF, Nitsche MA. A single bout of aerobic exercise
modulates motor learning performance and cortical excitability in humans. . Int J Clin
Health Psychol . (2023) 23:100333. doi: 10.1016/j.ijchp.2022.100333
35. Voss MW, Oehler C, Daniels W, Sodoma M, Madero B, Kent J, et al. Exercise
effects on brain health and learning from minutes to months: the brain extend trial.
Contemp Clin Trials . (2024) 145:107647. doi: 10.1016/j.cct.2024.107647
36. Yuan J, Xu B, Ma J, Pang X, Fu Y, Liang M, et al. Mots-C and aerobic exercise
induce cardiac physiological adaptation via nrg1/erbb4/cebpbeta modi ﬁcation in rats.
Life Sci. (2023) 315:121330. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.121330
37. Tani S, Suzuki Y, Yagi T, Takahashi A. Bilirubin may mediate the anti-
in ﬂammatory effects of aer obic exercise habits: implications for the
antiatherosclerotic effects of aerobic exercise. Coron Artery Dis . (2026) 37:8 –17.
doi: 10.1097/MCA.0000000000001546
38. Murray KO, Maurer GS, Gioscia-Ryan RA, Zigler MC, Ludwig KR, D ’Alessandro
A, et al. The plasma metabolome is associated with preservation of physiological
function following lifelong aerobic exercise in mice. Geroscience. (2024) 46:3311 –24.
doi: 10.1007/s11357-024-01062-x
39. Moreno-Cabanas A, Morales-Palomo F, Alvarez-Jimenez L, Mora-Gonzalez D,
Garcia-Camacho E, Martinez-Mulero B, et al. Clinical and physiological effects of high-
intensity aerobic training on metabolic syndrome: understanding the individual
exercise response variability. J Appl Physiol (1985) . (2025) 138:144 –56. doi: 10.1152/
japplphysiol.00501.2024
40. Talotta R, Porcello M, Restuccia R, Magaudda L. Mental effects of physical activity
in patients with ﬁbromyalgia: A narrative review. J Bodyw Mov Ther . (2024) 40:2190 –
204. doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2024.10.067
41. Galvao DA, Newton RU, Chambers SK, Spry N, Joseph D, Gardiner RA, et al.
Psychological distress in men with prostate cancer undertaking androgen deprivation
therapy: modifying effects of exercise from a year-long randomized controlled trial.
Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis . (2021) 24:758 –66. doi: 10.1038/s41391-021-00327-2
42. Tadsuan J, Lai YH, Lee YH, Chen MR. The effectiveness of exercise interventions
on psychological distress in patients with lung cancer: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Cancer Surviv . (2024). doi: 10.1007/s11764-024-01696-y
43. Furulund E, Carlsen SL, Alpers SE, Vold JH, Druckrey-Fiskaaen KT, Madebo T,
et al. Integrating an exercise program into opioid agonist therapy: A pilot study on
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org17
feasibility, ﬁtness improvements, and participation challenges. Addict Sci Clin Pract .
(2025) 20:52. doi: 10.1186/s13722-025-00583-w
44. Nero D, de Lira CRN, da Silva Lima Paz CL, de Farias Costa PR, de Magalhaes
Cunha C, Amador Bueno A, et al. Effect of physical activity on depression, anxiety, and
stress in women surviving breast cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. JH e a l t hP s y c h o l. (2025) 30:2825 –43. doi: 10.1177/
13591053241298752
45. Kong J. Can mind-body exercises be a solution for an aging/aged society? Brain
Behav Immun . (2021) 96:290 –1. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2021.05.029
46. Luciano M, Barry H, Sera ﬁni A. Exercise, especially resistance and mind-body
exercise, improves symptoms of depression in older adults. Recenti Prog Med . (2025)
116:187–8. doi: 10.1701/4460.44559
47. Leri J, Crombie KM, Dunsmoor JE, Cisler JM. Episodic memories bias contextual
threat inferences after aerobic and mind-body exercise. Ment Health Phys Act . (2025)
29. doi: 10.1016/j.mhpa.2025.100715
48. Wei GX, Yang L, Imm K, Loprinzi PD, Smith L, Zhang X, et al. Effects of mind-
body exercises on schizophrenia: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Front
Psychiatry. (2020) 11:819. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00819
49. Farahani MA, Soleimanpour S, Mayo SJ, Myers JS, Panesar P, Ameri F. The effect
of mind-body exercise on cognitive function in cancer survivors: A systematic review.
Can Oncol Nurs J . (2022) 32:38 –48. doi: 10.5737/236880763213848
50. Osypiuk K, Kilgore K, Ligibel J, Vergara-Diaz G, Bonato P, Wayne PM. Making
peace with our bodies ”: A qualitative analysis of breast cancer survivors ’ Experiences
with qigong mind-body exercise. J Altern Complement Med . (2020) 26:825 –32.
doi: 10.1089/acm.2019.0406
51. Zameer U, Tariq A, Asif F, Kamran A. Empowering minds and bodies: the impact
of exercise on multiple sclerosis and cognitive health. Ann Neurosci. (2024) 31:121 –3.
doi: 10.1177/09727531241227674
52. Wu C, Xu Y, Guo H, Tang C, Chen D, Zhu M. Effects of aerobic exercise and mind-
body exercise in parkinson ’s disease: A mixed-treatment comparison analysis. Front
Aging Neurosci . (2021) 13:739115. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.739115
53. Voss S, Boachie DA, Nieves N, Gothe NP. Mind-body practices, interoception and
pain: A scoping review of behavioral and neural correlates. Ann Med .( 2 0 2 3 )
55:2275661. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2023.2275661
54. Wang SZ, Yang C, Tian HF, Du SH, Fu WB, Zhao JP. from the body-mind holism
to psychosomatic medicine: theory and practice of acupuncture and moxibustion.
Zhongguo Zhen Jiu . (2023) 43:390 –4. doi: 10.13703/j.0255-2930.20221130-k0005
55. Kung YY, Shen YC, Li JY, Kao YK, Kuo TBJ, Yang CCH. Effects of mind-body
exercise on body constitution and circadian rhythm in people with suboptimal health
status. J Chin Med Assoc . (2024) 87:94 –102. doi: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000001014
56. Baussard L, Cousson-Gelie F, Jarlier M, Charbonnier E, Le Vigouroux S,
Montalescot L, et al. Hypnosis and cognitive behavioral therapy with online sessions
to reduce fatigue in patients undergoing chemotherapy for a metastatic colorectal
cancer: rational and study protocol for a feasibility study. Front Psychol . (2022)
13:953711. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.953711
57. Di Meglio A, Havas J, Soldato D, Presti D, Martin E, Pistilli B, et al. Development
and validation of a predictive model of severe fatigue after breast cancer diagnosis:
toward a personalized framework in survivorship care. J Clin Oncol. (2022) 40:1111–23.
doi: 10.1200/JCO.21.01252
58. Greenhouse-Tucknott A, Butterworth JB, Wrightson JG, Smeeton NJ, Critchley
HD, Dekerle J, et al. Toward the unity of pathological and exertional fatigue: A
predictive processing model. Cognit Affect Behav Neurosci . (2022) 22:215 –28.
doi: 10.3758/s13415-021-00958-x
59. Diogo Goncalves S, SM R. Understanding emotional fatigue: A systematic review of
causes, consequences, and coping strategies. Enferm Clin (Engl Ed) . (2025) 35:502190.
doi: 10.1016/j.enfcle.2025.502190
60. Xie EB, Sedov ID, Sanguino H, Freeman M, Kumari J, Tomfohr-Madsen L. Trait
mindfulness and sleep: interactions between observing and nonreactivity in the
association with sleep health. Health Psychol Open . (2023) 10:20551029221149282.
doi: 10.1177/20551029221149282
61. Smith CE, Mu CX, Venetto A, Khan A, Lee S, Small BJ. Be present now, sleep well
later: mindfulness promotes sleep health via emotion regulation. Health Psychol. (2024)
43:650–62. doi: 10.1037/hea0001373
62. Wunderlin M, Studler M, Gianotti LRR, Zust MA, Knoch D. Interindividual
differences in mindfulness are linked to sleep-electroencephalographic characteristics.
Sleep. (2024) 47. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsae101
63. Wong KF, Perini F, Lin J, Goldstein M, Ong JL, Lo J, et al. Dissociable changes in
sleep architecture with mindfulness and sleep hygiene intervention in older adults:
secondary and exploratory analysis of polysomnography data from the mindfulness
sleep therapy (Mist) trial. Sleep Health. (2022) 8:364–72. doi: 10.1016/j.sleh.2022.02.003
64. Jubera-Garcia E, Gevers W, Van Opstal F. Local build-up of sleep pressure could
trigger mind wandering: evidence from sleep, circadian and mind wandering research.
Biochem Pharmacol . (2021) 191:114478. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2021.114478
65. Knoerl R, Giobbie-Hurder A, Sannes TS, Chagpar AB, Dillon D, Dominici LS, et al.
Exploring the impact of exercise and mind-body prehabilitation interventions on
physical and psychological outcomes in women undergoing breast cancer surgery.
Support Care Cancer . (2022) 30:2027 –36. doi: 10.1007/s00520-021-06617-8
66. Liu J, Yan X, Chu L, Li CE, Hu J, Zou S. Mediating role of mental resilience between
sleep quality and mindfulness level of pregnant women screened by prenatal diagnosis.
J Healthc Eng . (2022) 2022:7011836. doi: 10.1155/2022/7011836
67. Yang Q, Zhang Y, Li S. The impact of mind-body exercise on the quality of life in
older adults: the chain mediation effect of perceived social support and psychological
resilience. Front Public Health . (2024) 12:1446295. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2024.1446295
68. De Nys L, Anderson K, Ofosu EF, Ryde GC, Connelly J, Whittaker AC. The effects
of physical activity on cortisol and sleep: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Psychoneuroendocrinology. (2022) 143:105843. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2022.105843
69. Liu L, Lv J, Piao W, Liu X, Li S, Lu X. Research on the in ﬂuence of yogalates
comprehensive rehabilitation training on postoperative recovery of breast cancer
patients. Explore (NY) . (2024) 20:340 –6. doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2023.09.005
70. Liu H, Liu S, Xiong L, Luo B. Effects of traditional chinese exercise on sleep quality:
A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Med
(Baltimore). (2023) 102:e35767. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000035767
71. Wiggenraad F, Bolam KA, Mijwel S, van der Wall E, Wengstrom Y, Altena R.
Long-term favorable effects of physical exercise on burdensome symptoms in the
optitrain breast cancer randomized controlled trial. Integr Cancer Ther . (2020)
19:1534735420905003. doi: 10.1177/1534735420905003
72. Grapp M, Rosenberger F, Hemlein E, Klein E, Friederich HC, Maatouk I.
Acceptability and feasibility of a guided biopsychosocial online intervention for
cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. JC a n c e rE d u c. (2022) 37:102 –10.
doi: 10.1007/s13187-020-01792-4
73. Van der Gucht K, Melis M, Ahmadoun S, Gebruers A, Smeets A, Vandenbulcke M,
et al. A mindfulness-based intervention for breast cancer patients with cognitive
impairment after chemotherapy: study protocol of a three-group randomized
controlled trial. Trials. (2020) 21:290. doi: 10.1186/s13063-020-4204-8
74. Kjeldsted E, Ammitzboll G, Laenkholm AV, Rasic D, Ceballos SG, Jorgensen LB,
et al. Effects of supervised exercise during neoadjuvant chemotherapy on tumor
response in patients with breast cancer (Neo-train): A randomized controlled trial.
Clin Cancer Res . (2025) 31:4265 –77. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-25-0416
75. Postigo-Martin P, Pena ﬁel-Burkhardt R, Gallart-Aragon T, Alcaide-Lucena M,
Artacho-Cordon F, Galiano-Castillo N, et al. Attenuating treatment-related
cardiotoxicity in women recently diagn osed with breast cancer via a tailored
therapeutic exercise program: protocol of the atope trial. Phys Ther . (2021) 101.
doi: 10.1093/ptj/pzab014
76. Carpenter DJ, Peluso C, Hilton C, Velasquez F, Annichine A, Matsko K, et al.
Exert-bc: A pilot study of an exercise regimen designed to improve functional mobility,
body composition, and strength after the treatment for breast cancer. Cancer Med .
(2024) 13:e7001. doi: 10.1002/cam4.7001
77. Winters-Stone KM, Boisvert C, Li F, Lyons KS, Beer TM, Mitri Z, et al. Delivering
exercise medicine to cancer survivors: has covid-19 shifted the landscape for how and
who can be reached with supervised group exercise? Support Care Cancer . (2022)
30:1903–6. doi: 10.1007/s00520-021-06669-w
78. Osypiuk K, Ligibel J, Giobbie-Hurder A, Vergara-Diaz G, Bonato P, Quinn R, et al.
Qigong mind-body exercise as a biopsychosocial therapy for persistent post-surgical
pain in breast cancer: A pilot study. Integr Cancer Ther . (2020) 19:1534735419893766.
doi: 10.1177/1534735419893766
79. Low SLK, Ho GF, Liu B, Koh ES, Fei Y, Teo CS, et al. Exploring guolin qigong
(Mind-body exercise) for improving cancer related fatigue in cancer survivors: A mixed
method randomized cont rolled trial protocol. Integr Cancer Ther . (2024)
23:15347354241252698. doi: 10.1177/15347354241252698
80. Joaquim A, Amarelo A, Antunes P, Garcia C, Leao I, Vilela E, et al. Effects of a
physical exercise program on quality of life and physical ﬁtness of breast cancer
survivors: the mama_Move gaia after treatment trial. Psychol Health Med . (2024)
29:964–87. doi: 10.1080/13548506.2023.2240074
81. Kingsberg S, Banks V, Caetano C, Janssenswillen C, Moeller C, Schoof N, et al.
Treatment utilization and non-drug interventions for vasomotor symptoms in breast
cancer survivors taking endocrine therapy: real-world ﬁndings from the United States
and europe. Maturitas. (2024) 188:108071. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2024.108071
82. Phillips SM, Starikovsky J, Solk P, Desai R, Reading JM, Hasanaj K, et al. Feasibility
and preliminary effects of theﬁt2thrivemb pilot physical activity promotion intervention
on physical activity and patient reported outcomes in individuals with metastatic breast
cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat . (2024) 208:391–403. doi: 10.1007/s10549-024-07432-5
Cui et al. 10.3389/fonc.2026.1798402
Frontiers in Oncology frontiersin.org18