PMC Home
PubMed Central (PMC) Home Page
About PMC
User Guide
Collections
For Authors
For Publishers
For Developers
12.0 million articles are archived in PMC.
New in PMC
Update on PMC Article Dataset Distribution Changes
Changes to PMC Article Dataset Distribution Services Coming in 2026
Updated Full-Text Search Now Available
An official website of the United States government
Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out
Primary site navigation
Logged in as:
Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Journal List
PubMed Central ® (PMC) is a free full-text archive of biomedical and life sciences journal literature at the U.S. National Institutes of Health's National Library of Medicine (NIH/NLM)
About PMC Discover a digital archive of scholarly articles, spanning centuries of scientific research.
Discover a digital archive of scholarly articles, spanning centuries of scientific research.
User Guide Learn how to find and read articles of interest to you.
Learn how to find and read articles of interest to you.
Collections Browse the PMC Journal List or learn about some of PMC's unique collections.
Browse the PMC Journal List or learn about some of PMC's unique collections.
For Authors Navigate the PMC submission methods to comply with a funder mandate, expand access, and ensure preservation.
Navigate the PMC submission methods to comply with a funder mandate, expand access, and ensure preservation.
For Publishers Learn about deposit options for journals and publishers and the PMC selection process.
Learn about deposit options for journals and publishers and the PMC selection process.
For Developers Find tools for bulk download, text mining, and other machine analysis.
Find tools for bulk download, text mining, and other machine analysis.
3012 Full Participation Journals Journals deposit the complete contents of each issue or volume.
3012 Full Participation Journals
Journals deposit the complete contents of each issue or volume.
249 NIH Portfolio Journals Journals deposit all NIH-funded articles as defined by the NIH Public Access Policy.
249 NIH Portfolio Journals
Journals deposit all NIH-funded articles as defined by the NIH Public Access Policy.
44 Selective Deposit Programs Publisher deposits a subset of articles from a collection of journals.
44 Selective Deposit Programs
Publisher deposits a subset of articles from a collection of journals.
As announced on February 12, major changes to PMC's Article Dataset Distribution Services are underway. Please note the follow…
The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) will be making major changes to PMC's Article Dataset Distribution Se…
NCBI has updated the PubMed Central (PMC) full-text search functionality and user experience.
Connect with NLM
National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894
Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Help
Accessibility
Careers
NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov