R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Open Access
Successful behavior change in obesity
interventions in adults: a systematic review
of self-regulation mediators
Pedro J Teixeira 1*, Eliana V Carraça 1, Marta M Marques 1, Harry Rutter 2, Jean-Michel Oppert 3,4,
Ilse De Bourdeaudhuij 5, Jeroen Lakerveld 6 and Johannes Brug 7
Abstract
Background: Relapse is high in lifestyle obesity interventions involving behavior and weight change. Identifying
mediators of successful outcomes in these interventions is critical to improve effectiveness and to guide approaches to
obesity treatment, including resource allocation. This article reviews the most consistent self-regulation mediators of
medium- and long-term weight control, physical activity, and dietary intake in clinical and community behavior change
interventions targeting overweight/obese adults.
Methods: A comprehensive search of peer-reviewed articles, published since 2000, was conducted on electronic
databases (for example, MEDLINE) and journal reference li sts. Experimental studies were eligible if they reported
intervention effects on hypothesized mediators (self-regulatory and psychological mechanisms) and the association
between these and the outcomes of interest (weight change, physical activity, and dietary intake). Quality and
content of selected studies were analyzed and findings s ummarized. Studies with formal mediation analyses were
reported separately.
Results: Thirty-five studies were included testing 42 putative mediators. Ten studies used formal mediation analyses.
Twenty-eight studies were randomized controlled trials, mainly aiming at weight loss or maintenance (n = 21). Targeted
participants were obese (n = 26) or overweight individuals, aged between 25 to 44 years (n = 23), and 13 studies
targeted women only. In terms of study quality, 13 trials were rated as “strong”,1 5a s “moderate”,a n d7s t u d i e s
as “weak”. In addition, methodological quality of formal mediation analyses was “medium”. Identified mediators for
medium-/long-term weight control were higher levels of autonomous motivation, self-efficacy/barriers, self-regulation
skills (such as self-monitoring), flexible eating restraint, and positive body image. For physical activity, significant
putative mediators were high autonomous motivation, self-efficacy, and use of self-regulation skills. For dietary
intake, the evidence was much less clear, and no consistent mediators were identified.
Conclusions: This is the first systematic review of mediational psychological mechanisms of successful outcomes in
obesity-related lifestyle change interventions. Despite limited evidence, higher autonomous motivation, self-efficacy,
and self-regulation skills emerged as the best predictors of beneficial weight and physical activity outcomes; for weight
control, positive body image and flexible eating restraint may additionally improve outcomes. These variables represent
possible targets for future lifestyle interventions in overweight/obese populations.
Keywords: Lifestyle interventions, Obesity, Self-regulation, Weight control, Physical activity, Dietary intake, Maintenance,
Behavior change, Mediation analysis
* Correspondence: pteixeira@fmh.ulisboa.pt
1Interdisciplinary Centre for the Study of Human Performance (CIPER), Faculty
of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Obesity: exploring the causes, consequences and solutions
© 2015 Teixeira et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 
DOI 10.1186/s12916-015-0323-6
Background
Lifestyle treatment interventions for obesity typically tar-
get changes in diet and physical activity through strategies
like setting adequate goals and enhancing patients ’ motiv-
ation, changing their beliefs and expectations, and provid-
ing guidance in the use of a variety of self-regulation skills
(such as self-monitoring), all of which are thought to in-
fluence behavior change and maintenance [1-4]. A wide
variety of health behavior change theories has been
employed to provide conceptual organization of these de-
terminants, including social cognitive theories such as the
theory of planned behavior [5], theories of motivation
such as self-determination theory [6], theories distinguish-
ing between motivational and post-motivational or vol-
itional phases [7] such as the health action process
approach (HAPA) [8], and self-regulation models such as
control theory [9]. Since all these theories address the
regulation of a person ’s behavior in the service of some
goal or desired outcome, through intrapersonal factors, in
this paper we broadly refer to intervening variables in this
process as self-regulation factors.
Behavior modification in general, and “comprehensive
lifestyle interventions ” in particular [10] are currently
the first recommended step in obesity management.
However, so far, randomized controlled trials evaluating
the effectiveness of programs that target lifestyle behav-
ior have shown mixed effects and, if effective, they have
generally resulted in only small changes in target behav-
iors [11-15]. In addition, the evidence shows that rela-
tively little if any weight loss accomplished in treatment
programs is maintained over the long term [16]. Further-
more, few studies have analyzed why, or by which mecha-
nisms, interventions are successful for some individuals
and not for others. Clearly, there is a need for research that
identifies causal predictors of long-term weight control, in-
cluding successful weight loss and maintenance [17].
Despite the limited success of available interventions
in reversing the current trends in obesity prevalence, ap-
proaches focusing on individual behavior change remain
an important topic of interest in obesity research. Sev-
eral reasons justify this assertion. First, these interven-
tions typically focus on behaviors (for example, diet and
physical activity), which have widespread consequences
for health, with or without weight loss. Second, if and
when individuals are able to successfully self-regulate
their behaviors, these effects tend to be sustainable,
which is essential for having a lasting impact on health;
moreover, this successful self-regulation may also “trans-
fer” to, and help change, other health behaviors [18].
Third, although some interventions targeting individuals
may be ineffective on their own, they might be able to
contribute to the effectiveness of strategies that integrate
multiple levels (that is, strategies that include individual-
level and environmental-level approaches) [19]. Finally,
the potential for dissemination of individual-level inter-
vention approaches is considerable, given that a sizable
number of overweight and obese persons will seek pro-
fessional help at some point in their lives. Consequently,
improving the efficacy of such interventions has substan-
tial clinical as well as public health relevance.
One recent development in studies testing lifestyle in-
terventions for obesity is their ability to identify the
mechanisms or processes by which interventions induce
meaningful and lasting change in their (most successful)
participants. These mechanisms can generally be named
predictors (or determinants) of success, and some studies
have gone one step further to evaluate the extent to
which they may be causal mediators of intervention ef-
fects. Testing of mediation, using appropriate methods,
is a critical step in this field; it provides the strongest
possible inference for the identification of elements in
interventions which are causally “responsible” for achiev-
ing desired outcomes [20].
Success and failure in the self-regulation of health behav-
iors involve multiple psychological and behavioral aspects.
The aim of this review was to identify and summarize psy-
chological self-regulation mediators of successful weight
change, or change in energy balance-related behavior
(physical activity and diet), in clinical and community be-
havior change obesity interventions. Because eventual
weight regain is frequent after behavior and/or weight
change interventions, particular attention was given to
studies reporting long-term outcomes, that is, one year or
more after the beginning of the intervention.
Methods
This systematic review was conducted in accordance
with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Re-
views and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [21].
Eligibility criteria
Studies were included in this review if they were interven-
tion studies published since 2000 in the English language,
used experimental designs, and referred to clinical or
community behavior change interventions with over-
weight/obese adults ( ≥18 years old) aiming to reduce
overweight/obesity. This review was limited to “lifestyle
interventions” defined as interventions that promote
change in energy balance-related behaviors (such as diet
and physical activity, as the outcomes) and self-regulatory
factors (such as motivation and self-monitoring, as the po-
tential mediators) relevant for overweight/obesity treat-
ment, typically in settings involving personal contact
between interventionists and participants. There were no
restrictions with respect to the format and duration of the
intervention. To be eligible, studies should also report out-
comes assessed at least 6 months after the start of the
intervention; include a quantitative assessment of change
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 2 of 16
in weight/BMI, physical activity (for example, self-
reported or accelerometer-derived minutes of moderate
and vigorous physical activity, daily pedometer steps, at-
tendance to PA sessions), or dietary intake (for example,
energy intake, fat intake, fruit and vegetable intake) as well
as a quantitative assessment of potential mediators of suc-
cessful behavior change. We decided not to distinguish
predictors of weight loss and predictors of weight loss
maintenance, choosing instead to divide the studies ac-
cording to the length of measurement periods (shorter
versus longer than 12 months). While it is possible that
predictors of those two processes differ, to appropriately
evaluate predictors of weight loss maintenance, we would
have to rely on studies of successful weight losers, and
preferably including psychological measures before and
after the maintenance period. Only one intervention study
fit both criteria.
An a priori list of mediators was used for study inclu-
sion/exclusion, based on previous work in this area (for
example, [2,22]). Only mediators representing individual-
level self-regulatory processes were considered (that is,
those related to skills, motivation, competence , coping
mechanisms, beliefs, physical self-perceptions, and eating
regulation factors such as disinhibition, restraint, and per-
ceived hunger). Mediators associated with personality fac-
tors, social support, and health-related outcomes (such as
psychological distress, quality of life, and well-being) were
excluded. Finally, eligible studies were required to report
the effect of the intervention on hypothesized mediator(s)
and the association of the putative mediator with the out-
comes of interest.
Search strategy and study selection
A comprehensive search of peer-reviewed articles pub-
lished between January 2000 and February 2014 (includ-
ing online ahead of print publication) was conducted in
six electronic databases (Pubmed, MEDLINE, PsycINFO,
the Cochrane Library, Web of Knowledge, and SPORT-
Discus). The decision to restrict the selection to studies
published since 2000 is based on the fact that recent de-
velopment in studies testing the effectiveness of lifestyle
interventions for obesity makes older studies less exter-
nally valid. For instance, in 1995, Friedman and Brownell
[23] alerted for the need of a “third generation ” of obes-
ity treatment studies analyzing causal mechanisms be-
tween psychosocial variables and weight change. Despite
this, one decade later, it has been observed that very few
studies had investigated such mechanisms, and even
fewer looked into long-term changes [2].
Searches included various combinations of four sets of
terms: i) terms concerning the health condition or popula-
tion of interest (overweight/obesity); ii) terms concerning
the intervention(s)/exposure(s) evaluated (for example,
behavior change/lifestyle obesity interventions); iii) terms
respecting the outcomes of interest (weight change, phys-
ical activity, and dietary intake); iv) terms concerning
the predictors/mediators of interest (psychological, self-
regulation); and v) terms concerning the type of analyses
of relevance (for example, mediation, correlates, predic-
tors). (See Additional file 1 for a search example; complete
search strategies can be obtained from the authors). Other
sources included manual cross-referencing of bibliograph-
ies cited in previous reviews [2,22,24-26] and included
studies, as well as manual searches of the content of key
scientific journals ( Obesity Reviews; International Journal
of Obesity; Obesity (Silver Spring); International Journal of
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity; Journal of the
American Dietetic Association; Psychology of Sports and
Exercise; Health Psychology; Journal of Behavioral Medi-
cine; Preventive Medicine).
Titles, abstracts, and references of potential articles were
reviewed by two authors (EVC, MM) to identify studies
that met the eligibility criteria. Duplicate entries were
manually removed. Relevant articles were then retrieved
for a full read. The same two authors reviewed the full text
of potential studies, and decisions to include or exclude
studies in the review were made by consensus.
Data coding and extraction
A data extraction form was developed, informed by the
PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews [21]
and the Cochrane Collaboration ’s tool for assessing risk
of bias [27]. Data extraction included information about
study details (authors, year, country of publication, affili-
ations, and funding), participants (characteristics, re-
cruitment, setting, attrition, compliance, and blinding),
study design and setting, outcomes of interest, mediators/
predictors (in/out list), intervention length and character-
istics, psychosocial instruments, and statistical analysis, in-
cluding mediation techniques (a complete coding form
can be obtained from the authors). Authors of included
studies were contacted when necessary to retrieve missing
data in published reports.
Considering that the main focus of this review was the
identification of mediators, data extraction was per-
formed separately, starting with the studies formally test-
ing mediation (see Additional file 2), followed by those
that reported both the effect of the intervention on hy-
pothesized mediators ( path a ) and the association of the
putative mediator with the outcomes of interest ( path
b), but did not test mediation (see Additional file 3). Re-
garding mediation and specifically in studies with formal
mediation tests, researchers could use Baron and Ken-
ny’s approach [28] and check whether the main effects
were reduced in the presence of the mediator, or employ
more sophisticated techniques to directly test the signifi-
cance of the indirect effect through the mediator (for
instance, by following MacKinnon ’s approach [29], and
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 3 of 16
using Preacher and Hayes mediation procedures or
structural equation modeling). Additional file 4 presents
a detailed description of the mediation analyses proce-
dures and estimates for each study. In the latter (that is,
predictor studies), we generally looked at a) whether sig-
nificant intervention-control differences existed for a
given variable (or pre-post change in non-controlled de-
signs); b) whether there was an association between
these changes (in intervention group only) and changes
in the outcome (weight/PA/diet) in this group. If both
were present, results were deemed consistent with
mediation.
Quality assessment
The quality of included studies was assessed using an
adapted version of the Quality Assessment Tool for
Quantitative Studies, developed by the Effective Public
Health Practice Project [30], and recommended for use
by the Cochrane Public Health Review Group [27]. The
current adaptation was based on recommendations from
several authors [31,32], and has been used in a previous
systematic review conducted as part of the SPOTLIGHT
project [33]. This tool was adapted to allow the evalu-
ation of both experimental and observational studies
and contains 19 items, guiding the assessment of eight
key methodological domains – 1) study design, 2) blind-
ing, 3) representativeness (selection bias), 4) representa-
tiveness (withdrawals/dropouts), 5) confounders, 6) data
collection, 7) data analysis, and 8) reporting. Each do-
main is classified as Strong (low risk of bias/high meth-
odological quality), Moderate,o r Low (high risk of bias/
low methodological quality) methodological quality. A
global rating is determined based on the scores of each
component (see Additional file 5 for a full description of
the Assessment Tool components and scoring system).
Two researchers independently rated each of the eight
domains and overall quality (EVC, MM). Discrepancies
were resolved by consensus.
For studies employing formal tests of mediation, assess-
ment of methodological quality was complemented with a
checklist tool developed specifically for mediation analysis
by Lubans, Foster, and Biddle [34], and subsequently
adapted by Rhodes and Pfaeffli [35]. This tool includes 11
questions answered with a yes (1) or no (0) format, whose
scores are added to generate a global score. High quality is
represented by scores between 9 and 11, moderate quality
ranges between 5 and 8, and low quality is considered
when scores are below 5 (see Additional file 5 for a full de-
scription of the Checklist components and scoring sys-
tem). Methodological quality of the mediation analyses
was also rated by two authors (EVC, MM), with conflict-
ing judgments discussed to reach agreement. Inter-rater
agreement was good (Cohen’sk a p p a=0 . 7 8 ) .
Data synthesis
This review analyzed psychological and self-regulation
mediators and predictors of change in body weight or
BMI (primary outcome), physical activity, and dietary in-
take, separately (Note: we will use the term predictors
when studies did not test for formal mediation, and me-
diators when they did). Intervention effects on the out-
comes of interest were included in Additional files 2 and
3. Results were divided according to the length of assess-
ment of the outcomes, into short-term (<12 months
from the start of the intervention) and long-term ( ≥12
months), so that those variables mediating/predicting
more sustainable outcomes (the main focus of this re-
view) could be more easily identified. Twelve months
has been indicated by an expert panel on obesity as an
appropriate threshold between weight loss and the main-
tenance of the weight lost [10]. In the synthesis of data
derived from studies formally testing mediation, only
controlled trials were included, to further strengthen in-
ference regarding intervention effects on mediators and
outcomes. In the case of prediction studies (not formally
testing mediation), we included both controlled and un-
controlled trials, to capitalize on the (relatively) larger
number of studies available, which would otherwise be
excluded using the more stringent criteria. Table 1 de-
scribes the 35 included studies. In Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
and 7, mediation-specific results are discriminated from
the general results, provided that the main goal of this
review was the identification of self-regulation mediators
in behavior change obesity interventions. The overall re-
sults (considering multivariate, bivariate/correlational,
and mediation analyses) are also presented in each table
(Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7). A total of 42 mediators/pre-
dictors were identified across outcomes. To facilitate
data interpretation, considering the very large number of
individual variables, these were grouped together by simi-
larity into categories. Categorization was done through the
extraction of information from primary studies on the def-
inition and operationalization of the constructs. The follow-
ing 12 categories were formed: Self-regulatory skills use,
Processes of change, Coping mechanisms, Self-efficacy/bar-
riers, Autonomous motivation, Controlled motivation, De-
cisional balance, Outcomes ex pectations/beliefs, Body
image/physical self-worth, Cognitive restraint, Eating disin-
hibition, Perceived hunger. Please refer to Additional file 6
for full details regarding the mediators/predictors iden-
tified per outcome.
Finally, Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 show, separately for
each mediator/predictor, the number of studies that
have analyzed it, the number of times it was tested
(some of them within the same study), and the number
of times a significant effect was found. Results are pre-
sented for mediation-specific results and for the overall
results.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 4 of 16
Results
Study selection
The literature search yielded a total of 1,394 potentially
relevant records. Eight additional articles that were iden-
tified through manual searches and cross-referencing
were added, bringing the total number of potential
Table 1 Characteristics of intervention studies examining
potential mediators/predictors of weight control, physical
activity, and food intake (n = 35)
Characteristics Number of
studies
Characteristics Number of
studies
Study design
(n = 35)
Intervention
(n = 35)
Trial Aim
NCT 6 Weight loss 15
NRCT 1 Weight maintenance 6
RCT 28 Exercise adherence 3
Arms Health promotion 8
1 arm 6 Other 2
2 arms 18 Theoretical groundsb
3 arms 8 SCT 23
4 or + arms 3 TTM 5
Sample size SDT 3
<100 2 Other 8
100-199 12 N.R. 4
200-299 11 Intervention setting
≥300 10 University 15
Hospital/clinic 3
Participants
(n = 35)
Exercise/fitness
club
12
Gender Community 3
Women only 13 Web 1
Both genders 22 Other 1
Mean age, years Intervention length
25-44 23 <6 months 6
45-64 11 6-12 months 16
N.R. 1 12-24 months 12
BMI ≥24 months 1
25-29.9 2 Post-intervention follow-up (n = 11)
30-34.9 14 <6 months 1
35-39.9 4 6-12 months 5
≥40 8 12-24 months 4
N.R. 7 ≥24 months 1
Table 1 Characteristics of intervention studies examining
potential mediators/predictors of weight control, physical
activity, and food intake (n = 35) (Continued)
Characteristics Number of
studies
Characteristics Number of
studies
Mediation analysis
(n = 10)
Outcomes
Type of test Weight change
(n = 26)
Regression-based 2 Short-term
(<12 months)
9
P and H/bootstrap 4 Long-term
(≥12 months)
17
SEM/bootstrap 4
Mediation approach (and criteria) a Physical activity
(n = 19)
Baron and Kenny 3 Short-term
(<12 months)
11
MacKinnon et al. 7 Long-term
(≥12 months)
8
Shrout and Bolger 2 Self-reported
(MVPA)
15
MacArthur 1 Self-reported (LPA) 2
Self-reported
(Energy Exp.)
1
Quality assessment score Objectivec, d 4
Quality score (EPHPP tool; n = 35)
Weak 7 Food/energy intake
(n = 11)e
Moderate 15 Short-term (<12
months)
7
Strong 13 Long-term ( ≥12
months)
4
Quality score (Rhodes tool; n = 10) Total energy intake 3
Low 0 Fat/saturated fat 6
Moderate 10 Fruit/vegetable 7
High 0 Other (CH; protein) 1
Notes: NCT, non-controlled trial; NRCT, non-randomized controlled trial (for
example, a study comparing two interventions, but without a real control
group); RCT, randomized controlled trial (Note: two studies referred to post
hoc analyses of existing RCTs, for outcomes that were not planned originally);
N.R., not reported; P and H, Preacher and Hayes mediation procedures; SEM,
structural equation modeling; EPHPP, Effective Public Health Practice Project;
SCT, socio-cognitive theory; TTM, transtheoretical model; SDT, self-determination
theory; MVPA, moderate and vigorous physical activity; LPA, lifestyle physical
activity; Energy Exp., energy expenditure. aTwo studies used more than one
mediation approach. bSix studies used more than one theoretical framework.
cObjective assessments included accelerometry (n = 1), pedometry (n = 1), and
actual attendance to a fitness club (n = 2). dTwo of the studies also assessed
self-reported physical activity.eThree studies assessed more than one outcome.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 5 of 16
articles to 1,404. Of these, 770 abstracts were assessed
for eligibility (634 duplicates removed). After the initial
screening of titles and abstracts, 692 articles were ex-
cluded (Figure 1). Some articles were excluded for mul-
tiple reasons. Thirty-five articles describing 32 unique
lifestyle interventions met the eligibility criteria and were
therefore included [36-70]. Papers reporting on the same
intervention are identified in Additional files 2 and 3.
Study characteristics
The characteristics of included studies are summarized in
T able 1 (for further details, see Additional files 2 and 3).
Most studies (n = 28) were randomized controlled trials,
mainly aiming at weight loss or weight loss maintenance
(n = 21). Most interventions took place in university (n =
15) or fitness club settings (n = 12), and most lasted more
than 6 months (n = 29). However, only 11 trials included a
follow-up assessment period and, of these, more than half
were shorter than 12 months. Most studies were based
on, or at least informed by, one or more theories of behav-
ior change; the most frequent being social cognitive theory
(n = 23), the transtheoretical model (n = 5), and self-
determination theory (n = 3). Eight interventions were
grounded in other theories, including group dynamics the-
ory, problem solving model, theory of planned behavior,
health belief model, and self-regulation theory. Four studies
did not report using any theoretical framework. Samples
were mostly composed of obese individuals (n = 26), aged
Table 2 Mediators/predictors of short-term weight control (<12 months)
Putative mediators
(categories)
Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↑ Self-regulation skill use 6 12 92 a
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 6 9 67* b
↑ Body image/physical self-worth 2 6 67*
↓ Eating disinhibition 1 4 75* c
↑ Cognitive restraint 1 3 33* a
↑ Processes of change 1 2 50*
↑ Decisional balance (pros/cons) 1 1 100*
↓ Perceived hunger 1 1 100* c
↑ Positive outcome expectations 1 1 0
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested using formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was
analyzed; Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Since mediation analyses were not conducted, results are
organized according to the number of times each variable was tested in the overall analyses, depicted in the fifth column, in descent order. * ≥ 50% of these
effects are based on correlational analyses. aTested twice in weak quality studies. bTested three times in weak quality studies. cTested in a weak quality study.
[↑] means that higher value of (variable) was associated with improved outcomes; [ ↓] means "lower value of (variable)" was associated with improved outcomes.
Table 3 Mediators/predictors of medium/long-term weight control ( ≥12 months)
Putative mediators (categories) Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↓ Controlled motivation for PA 1 4 0 1 8 0
↑ Self-regulation skill use 3 3 75 6 6 83 a
↑ Body image/self-worth 2 3 100 4 34 62*
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 2 3 67 6 28 68*
↑ Autonomous motivation for PA 1 2 100 2 8 100*
↑ Flexible restraint 1 2 100 2 5 60
↑ Positive outcome expectations/beliefs 1 2 0 3 6 50
↓ Eating disinhibition 1 1 100 3 16 38*
↑ Cognitive restraint (total) 4 8 50*
↓ Perceived hunger 3 5 20*
↑ Coping mechanisms 1 2 0
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested using formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was analyzed;
Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Results are organized according to the number of times each variable wa s
tested in mediation analyses, depicted in the second column, in descent order. For variables not tested in mediation analyses, the fifth column (times tested in overall
analyses) should be taken as the reference. * ≥ 50% of these effects are based on correlational analyses. aTested once in a weak quality study. [ ↑] means that higher
value of (variable) was associated with improved outcomes; [↓] means "lower value of (variable)" was associated with improved outcomes.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 6 of 16
between 25 to 44 years old (n = 23), and 13 studies targeted
women only.
Twenty-six studies evaluated mediators/predictors of
weight change, of which 17 reported medium/long-term
outcomes; 19 studies evaluated mediators/predictors of
physical activity, with 8 of them reporting medium/long-
term outcomes; finally, 11 studies investigated dietary in-
take as the outcome measure, 4 of them in the medium/
long-term. Weight-related measurements were performed
with calibrated digital scales, and weight changes were
expressed in weight change percent from baseline (n = 9),
in kilograms (n = 10), as residualized scores regressed on
the baseline scores (n = 6), or as BMI changes (n = 3).
Regarding physical activity, objective measures were
employed in 4 studies (for example, accelerometry, pedo-
metry) and self-reported instruments in 17 studies; of
these, 6 used the Seven-Day Physical Activity Recall [71]
and 6 studies used the Godin Leisure-Time Exercise
Questionnaire [72]. Dietary and caloric intake, indirectly
assessed through the number of servings, was collected
with the Food Intake Questionnaire in most studies (n =
5), followed by the Three-Day Food Records in most of
the studies (n = 3), and the Block Food-Frequency Ques-
tionnaire (n = 1).
Quality assessment
The overall results of the quality assessment can be
found in Table 1 and the total quality score for each
study in Additional files 2 and 3 (for a detailed classifica-
tion of each item and study see Additional file 7). Re-
garding the overall methodological quality of the studies,
13 studies were rated as ”strong”, 15 were classified as
”moderate”, and 7 were rated as ”weak”. All included
studies scored strong on the Study design , as they were
experimental. Thirteen studies were rated as weak re-
garding Blinding of participants (during recruitment)
and outcome assessors, 13 were rated as moderate, 8 as
strong, and 1 did not receive a rating, as it was a non-
Table 4 Mediators/predictors of short-term physical activity (<12 months)
Putative mediators (categories) Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↑ Body image/physical self-worth 1 2 50 3 6 67* a
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 1 1 0 10 15 67*
↑ Self-regulation skill usage 7 13 85*
↑ Motivational readiness 1 2 50
↑ Processes of change 1 2 50*
↑ Decisional balance (pros/cons) 1 1 100*
↑ Positive outcome expectations/beliefs 1 1 0
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested in formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was analyzed;
Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Results are organized according to the number of times each variable
was tested in mediation analyses, depicted in the second column, in descent order. For variables not tested in mediation analyses, the fifth column (t imes tested
in overall analyses) should be taken as the reference. * ≥ 50% of these effects are based on correlational analyses. aTested once in a weak quality study. [ ↑] means
that higher value of (variable) was associated with improved outcomes.
Table 5 Mediators/predictors of medium/long-term physical activity ( ≥12 months)
Putative mediators (categories) Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↓ Controlled motivation for PA 2 8 0 2 12 25*
↑ Autonomous motivation for PA 2 6 83 2 14 93*
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 4 6 67 a 61 2 7 5 b
↑ Positive outcome expectations/beliefs 2 3 0 3 3 0
↑ Self-regulation skill usage 2 2 50 a 33 6 7 b
↑ Coping mechanisms 1 2 0 1 2 0
↑ Decisional balance (pros/cons) 1 2 0
↑ Cognitive restraint 1 3 0
↑ Processes of change 1 2 0
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested in formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was analyzed;
Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Results are organized according to the number of times each variable
was tested in mediation analyses, depicted in the second column, in descent order. For variables not tested in mediation analyses, the fifth column (t imes tested
in overall analyses) should be taken as the reference. * ≥ 50% of these effects are based on correlational analyses. aTested once in a weak quality study. bTested
twice in weak quality studies. [ ↑] means that higher value of (variable) was associated with improved outcomes; [ ↓] means "lower value of (variable)" was
associated with improved outcomes.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 7 of 16
randomized trial. All studies except two (one scored
weak and the other scored strong) scored moderate re-
garding Representativeness (selection bias). Regarding
reporting of Withdrawals and dropouts , 5 studies were
rated as weak, 16 as moderate, and 14 as strong. Four
studies scored weak in the adjustment of analysis for Con-
founders, 10 scored moderate, and 21 strong. In terms of
Data collection tools, 4 studies were rated as weak as they
did not provide information on the validity or reliability of
the measures used, 11 were classified as moderate, and 17
as strong. Three studies were not rated as they used a lar-
ger dataset for which information on psychometric prop-
erties of the measures is already provided. All studies
scored strong in the use of Appropriate statistical ana-
lyses.I nt e r m so f Reporting, 30 studies were rated as
strong, and 5 studies as moderate.
In addition, studies including formal tests of mediation
(n = 10) were classified as of moderate (n = 10) quality
on the mediation analysis checklist. None of the studies
reported conducting pilot studies to test mediation, and
in all except two studies, there was no specific informa-
tion regarding the power of the analysis to detect medi-
ation. In only six studies were the outcomes controlled
for baseline values.
Mediators/predictors tested in studies with weak
methodological quality are identified in Tables 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, and 7. Overall, there appeared to be no association
between the methodological quality of the studies and
the results of the mediation analyses. Only 2 out of the 7
studies with a global weak score reported significant re-
sults for all mediator/predictors.
Mediators/predictors of weight control
Of the total number of studies investigating mediators/
predictors of weight control (n = 26), 9 looked into short-
term outcomes (<12 months) [47-49,51,52,54,57,62,70].
Twenty-one variables, grouped into nine categories, were
tested as mediators/predictors of short-term weight con-
trol (T able 2). None of the studies performed formal tests
of mediation. In the overall analyses (in this case, all were
multivariate), self-regulation skill use emerged as the most
consistent predictor of short-term weight control (consist-
ent with mediation in 92% of the times it was tested [12
times in 6 studies]). Other variables that appear promising
as mediators of short-term weight control were higher
self-efficacy (and/or lower perceived barriers) and more
positive body image, both consistent with mediation in
67% of the times they were tested (a total of 9 and 6 times,
respectively). In the case of self-efficacy, 2 (out of 6) stud-
ies presented with low methodological quality. Although
lower eating disinhibition also appears to find empirical
support in non-formal mediation analyses, these results
come from a single, weak quality study, and are
Table 6 Mediators/predictors of short-term dietary intake (<12 months)
Putative mediators
(categories)
Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 6 12 75*
↑ Self-regulation skill usage 5 12 75*
↑ Motivational readiness 1 4 0
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested in formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was analyzed;
Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Since mediation analyses were not conducted, results are organized
according to the number of times each variable was tested in the overall analyses, depicted in the fifth column, in descent order. * ≥ 50% of these effects are
based on correlational analyses. [ ↑] means that higher value of (variable) was associated with improved outcomes.
Table 7 Mediators/predictors of medium/long-term dietary intake ( ≥12 months)
Putative mediators (categories) Formal mediation analyses All analyses
Number of studies Times tested Effect, % Number of studies Times tested Effect, %
↑ Self-efficacy/barriers 1 2 50 3 8 25
↑ Coping mechanisms 1 2 0 2 4 0
↑ Positive outcome expectations/beliefs 1 1 0 2 2 0
↑ Processes of change 1 8 0
↑ Cognitive restraint 1 6 0
↑ Decisional balance (pros/cons) 1 4 0
↑ Self-regulation skill usage 2 2 100 a
Notes: Blank spaces correspond to variables that were not tested in formal mediation analyses. Times tested refers to the number of times a variable was analyzed;
Effect, % refers to the number of times an effect was found and is expressed as percentage. Results are organized according to the number of times each variable
was tested in mediation analyses, depicted in the second column, in descent order. For variables not tested in mediation analyses, the fifth column (t imes tested
in overall analyses) should be taken as the reference. aTested twice in weak quality studies. [ ↑] means that higher value of (variable) was associated with improved
outcomes.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 8 of 16
correlational in nature. There were no other consistent
mediators/predictors of short-term weight control.
Seventeen studies investigated potential mediators/pre-
dictors of long-term (≥12 months) weight outcomes, the
main focus of the review [36,39,40,43-45,55,56,58,59,63-66].
Of these, six were RCTs that included formal tests of medi-
ation [36,39,40,43-45]. Thirty variables, grouped in 12 cat-
egories, were tested as potential mediators/predictors
(Table 3). The variables with stronger empirical support
in formal mediation studies were body image, which
was significant in all the times it was tested (3 times),
and self-regulation skills, which was identified as a me-
diator in 67% of the times it was tested (2 times out of
3 studies). Self-efficacy was a significant mediator in 2
of the 3 times it was tested. For autonomous motivation
and flexible eating restraint, results appear promising
but derive from a single study in each case. Results ob-
served in non-mediation analyses were consistent with
the most stringent analyses, especially those concerning
self-regulation skill use, autonomous motivation, and
self-efficacy. For self-regulation skill use, significant ef-
fects were found in 83% of the 6 times it was tested,
and every time in multivariate analyses. For autono-
mous motivation, results were consistent with mediation
in all cases, but they originate from only two studies. On
the other hand, empirical support from non-mediation
analyses for other variables like body image and self-
efficacy appears comparatively weaker and correlation-
based; yet, the number of times each of these variables
was tested is substantially higher (34 and 28 times, re-
spectively). Eating disinhibition, which appeared to be an
additional predictor in the short-term, does not seem to
be consistent in the long-term provided that it was signifi-
cant only in 38% of the 16 times it was tested. There were
no other consistent mediators/predictors of long-term
weight control.
Mediators/predictors of physical activity
Of the total number of studies investigating mediators/
predictors of physical activity (n = 19), 11 looked into
short-term outcomes (less than 6 months beyond the start
of the intervention) [37,46,51-53,60,61,67-70]. Of these,
only one formally tested mediation [37]. Fourteen vari-
ables, grouped in seven categories, were tested as media-
tors/predictors of short-term weight control (T able 4).
Regarding mediation-specific results, body image emerged
as a significant mediator only in one of the two times it
was tested. In non-mediation studies, stronger empirical
support was found for self-regulation skill use, which was
significant in 11 of the 13 times it was tested (correspond-
ing to 7 different studies). Body image and self-efficacy ap-
pear to be promising as mediators of short-term physical
activity, showing significant results in 4 (out of 6) and 10
(out of 15) times they were tested, respectively. No other
Additional records identified through 
other sources (n =8)
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 
(n=1); Health Education Research (n=1); 
International Journal of Obesity (n=1); Journal 
of Obesity (n=1); Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine (n=1); International Journal of 
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 
(n=1); The Permanente Journal (n=2)
Figure 1 Flow diagram of studies.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 9 of 16
consistent mediators/predictors of short-term physical ac-
tivity were identified.
Eight studies analyzed mediators/predictors of long-term
physical activity [36,38,41-43,50,64,65], of which five used
formal tests of mediation [36,38,41-43]. Twenty-three var-
iables, grouped in nine categories, were tested as predic-
tors (T able 5). The main predictors of long-term physical
activity were autonomous motivation and self-efficacy,
considering both mediation-specific analyses and the over-
all analyses. For autonomous motivation, results from two
studies showed that mediation analyses were significant in
83% of the times and overall analyses showed consistency
with mediation in 93% of the times (out of 14). For
self-efficacy, results originated from 6 different studies.
Mediation analyses were significant in 67% of the times
self-efficacy was tested (6 times); and in the overall ana-
lyses, results were consistent with mediation in 75% of
the times (out of 12). Controlled motivation was also
consistently unrelated with physical activity outcomes,
independent of the type of analyses performed. Finally,
self-regulation skill use appears to mediate long-term
physical activity in one out of two (formal mediation)
and two out of the three (all analyses) times tested, but
these results derive from two studies with low meth-
odological quality.
Mediators/predictors of dietary intake
Of the total number of studies (n = 11) investigating me-
diators/predictors of dietary intake, seven looked into
short-term outcomes [46,53,61,67-70] and four into
long-term outcomes [41,50,64,65]. Only one study for-
mally tested mediation [41]. Seven variables (grouped in
three categories) were tested as mediators/predictors of
short-term dietary intake, while 12 variables (grouped in
seven categories) were tested in the long-term (Tables 6
and 7). Self-efficacy/barriers and self-regulation skill use
appear promising as mediators of dietary intake in the
short-term, both showing results consistent with medi-
ation in 75% of the times they were tested (12 times out
of 6 studies for self-efficacy, and 12 times out of 5 stud-
ies for self-regulation skills). No consistent mediators/
predictors were identified in the longer time frame. Yet,
self-efficacy was consistently unrelated with long-term
dietary intake, looking less promising as a mediator (re-
sults were consistent with mediation only in 2 of the 8
times it was tested).
Discussion
This review sought to identify the most consistent
individual-level mediators of weight change, physical ac-
tivity, and obesity-related dietary variables, in the context
of lifestyle obesity interventions aimed at overweight and
obese adults. These mediators or predictors of interven-
tion effects were assessed by self-report, and are thought
to represent psychological mechanisms or processes by
which interventions affect body weight, through changes
in energy-balance related behaviors. Note that this review
did not focus on the efficacy of the interventions ’ main ef-
fects per se. However, mediation mechanisms can be eval-
uated even in the absence of main significant effects of
interventions, particularly in controlled trials [20].
Special emphasis was given to variables tested as formal
mediators of changes in the outcomes of interest, as this
provides the best possible inferences regarding causal de-
terminants of behavior change [73]; to the extent a con-
sistent mediator is identified, it can more confidently be
targeted in future interventions of comparable characteris-
tics. Moreover, because it is unlikely that any single factor
(self-regulatory or otherwise) by itself will explain a large
s h a r eo fv a r i a n c eo fc h a n g ei nc o m p l e xb e h a v i o r ss u c h
as physical activity and diet (as a result of an interven-
tion), the identification of groups of significant predic-
tors, which can be then discussed in the context of
current theories of behavior change, can additionally con-
tribute to understanding the role of theory in health be-
havior change [74,75].
As in many systematic reviews of behavior change inter-
ventions, the diversity of studies available - reflected on a
similarly diverse set of independent (and dependent) vari-
ables, study designs, measurement methods, populations
represented, and so forth - is a substantial limitation. In
the present review, the large number of predictors per
study, combined with substantial heterogeneity in study
length, type and format of interventions (for example,
web-based, face to face, group-based), and assessments
employed for each variable made the task at hand espe-
cially difficult. In this scenario, the fact that several vari-
ables were identified as predictors or, in some cases,
actual mediators of intervention-related change in weight
control and physical activity is encouraging. Specifically,
the present review shows that positive changes in body
image, in autonomous motivation for physical activity, in
self-efficacy (and fewer perceived barriers), and in the use
of self-regulation skills (such as self-monitoring) are
promising aspects that may explain the variability of re-
sults in current lifestyle obesity treatment interventions.
Increases in flexible restraint could also be in this group
with respect to weight outcomes, but with lower inference.
Therefore, these are currently the best evidence-based
candidates to target in future individual-level, real-world
interventions in this domain.
Some qualifications to the previous conclusions are of
note. First, for short-term results, formal tests of medi-
ation were only reported for one of the outcomes of
interest (physical activity) and taking into account only
two mediators (body image/self-worth and self-efficacy/
barriers). Second, there are currently too few studies using
dietary variables as outcomes to allow us to draw
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 10 of 16
meaningful conclusions, and only one study tested formal
mediation for both time frames. Third, the external valid-
ity of some of the reported findings, such as regarding
self-regulation skills and autonomous motivation, may be
limited, because these findings were derived from few
studies conducted by a small number of research groups,
using similar study designs.
Body image appeared important as a mechanism lead-
ing to change in body weight in several studies. Body
image is a multidimensional concept [76] that depicts at-
titudes, perceptions, and in some cases behaviors associ-
ated with mental representations of one ’s body (or some
of its parts) [77,78]. Poor body image often reflects a
high level of concern with body weight or shape, what is
known as dysfunctional investment in body image, when
body esteem occupies an excessive role as a determinant
of overall self-esteem [79]. Previous reviews [2,22] have
identified poor body image as a predictor of less success
at body weight loss (or, conversely, better body image as
a positive factor in obesity treatment interventions). Po-
tential reasons for this association range from excessive
psychological pressure leading to more rigid and incon-
sistent eating regulation [80-82] - poor body image being
associated with a history of failed attempts and thus be-
ing a marker for other physiological, psychological, or
socio-environmental risk factors for weight gain/regain
[83,84] - to motivational factors in which external pres-
sures and goals predominate but tend not to produce
behavior change in consistent or healthy ways (for ex-
ample, wanting to be thin for reasons related to social
comparison and perceived desirability) [85-87].
Autonomous motivation, a concept derived from self-
determination theory (SDT, [88]), generally indicates the
degree to which individuals self-endorse, feel that they
have a choice about, and attribute deeply reflected value
to a certain behavior. In contrast with the most common
quantitative view of motivation (how much?), the level
of autonomy represents a qualitative analysis of people ’s
psychological energy to act, which is perceived as internal
(reflecting a sense of “ownership” over the behavior). Au-
tonomous motivation is often associated with goals such
as pursuing positive personal challenges, attaining/pre-
serving health and well-being, social affiliation, personal
development, and self-expression [89]. Additionally, be-
cause self-determined, well-internalized behaviors are as-
sociated with the satisfaction of the needs for autonomy,
competence, and relatedness - and with the feelings of in-
ternal coherence and well-being that are thought to
emerge from those experiences - this provides an explan-
ation for the behavior to be pursued consistently [89]. A
recent meta-analysis [90] and other reviews provide em-
pirical support for both the SDT motivation model and
the association of autonomous motivation with health be-
havior change in different areas [91].
Self-efficacy and perceived barriers are common vari-
ables in several theoretical frameworks concerned with
health behaviors [92,93]. Self-efficacy measures one ’sc o n -
fidence to successfully implement a course of action by
successfully organizing internal and external resources
[94]. Although efficacy can be assessed towards other as-
pects of behavior regulation, it is commonly conceptual-
ized and assessed as “barriers efficacy ” or confidence to
overcome internal or external obstacles that may stand in
the way of one ’s actions. Indeed, the correlation between
self-efficacy and perceived barriers is usually high [56]
(which explains our decision to group these variables in
the same category). Although conceptual differences exist,
self-efficacy is often equated to the concept of perceived
behavior control (from the theory of planned behavior) or
perceived competence (as used in self-determination the-
ory). In practical and simple terms, enhancing confidence
and competence about a given health behavior appears to
be helpful in overcoming barriers - namely in initial stages
of adoption - and is often a first step to increase and im-
prove motivation for change.
Flexible eating restraint involves regulating one ’s food
intake so that no particular behavior is forbidden and
thus subject to rigid control and scrutiny [95]. Flexible
restraint is generally associated with less internal pres-
sure to diet and a more gradual understanding of the di-
et’s impact on energy balance. It stands in opposition to
rigid restraint [96]. Although, in the past, cognitive re-
straint was measured as a unified concept, its separation
into flexible and rigid dimensions is increasingly fre-
quent in obesity studies and has proven useful in under-
standing diet and weight regulation, particularly in the
long-term. For example, we found that flexible, but not
rigid or total restraint, mediated 24-month weight loss in
overweight women [39] and, in the present review, results
for the total restraint scale and the flexible scale also dif-
fered, as in other studies [97]. More broadly, psychological
flexibility appears to predict health and psychological
well-being [97], is thought to reflect more committed,
values-based goal pursuit [98,99] and is considered a hall-
mark of self-determination [89], factors which may help
explain successful health behavior self-regulation.
Finally, the use of certain self-regulation skills, for in-
stance, monitoring weight, diet, and activity, as well as
employing goal setting and planning techniques, was also
identified as a relatively consistent predictor of successful
outcomes, most especially in the shorter-term analyses. In
brief, some of these skills may be important for people to
ultimately act on their positive intentions. Sometimes
associated with self-regulation theories ( cf. [100]) these
variables are more skill-based (in some cases, they are
discrete behaviors in themselves) and somewhat differ-
ent than the previous set of predictors, more intrapsy-
chic. Notably, recent behavior change models focusing
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 11 of 16
on the “intention-behavior gap ” (see, for example,
[7,101,102]) make the distinction between motivational
and implementation phases (sometimes referred to as
“volitional ” or “post-motivational ”), with self-regulation
skills reviewed in the present study falling in the latter
phase [103]. Results from the present review suggest
that some combination of motivational and implementa-
tion factors is important. Although this needs confirm-
ation, there is some indication that the latter may be
especially useful in early stages of behavioral adoption,
whereas motivational factors may be operative along the
entire continuum from adoption to maintenance, as
highlighted recently in a separate study [104].
In looking at the collective findings from the present
analysis, the temptation to interpret them in an integrative
way is unavoidable. In principle, there should be “a logic”
as to why this set of predictors emerged and not a differ-
ent one, even considering the intrinsic limitations of the
available data (see below). In this exercise, we are in-
formed by our own research, for instance, linking im-
proved eating regulation, including flexible eating, with
improved body image [105] and with exercise autono-
mous motivation [18] and also by other studies. For ex-
ample, recently, in a large dataset of women in New
Zealand, autonomous motivation for eating was associated
with less binge eating and slower speed of eating (and a
much healthier diet), indicative of improved eating self-
regulation [106]. The literature looking at relations be-
tween body image and eating behavior is also fertile in
suggesting a close association between improved body
image, improved eating regulation, and better weight con-
trol (see, for example, [55,87]). In this respect, an attempt
was recently made to provide an integrative view of eating
regulation and weight maintenance, which also includes
an explanation for the etiology and role of body image
concerns and disordered eating, while considering motiv-
ational and self-regulatory aspects [80]. It links goals (such
as appearance versus health focus) and the predominant
approach to eating regulation (such as rigid versus flexible
restraint; focus on quality versus quantity) with the satis-
faction of the needs for competence, autonomy, and re-
latedness, resulting in more or less adaptive diet and
weight regulation (see Figures one and two in [80] for
more details). The evidence from other recent systematic
reviews and meta-analyses, showing that more autono-
mous forms of health behavior regulation, in physical ac-
tivity [91], weight control [2], and in health more generally
[90] are predictive of better adherence and improved out-
comes, is also consistent with the relationships found in
the present study.
While some limitations of the present work have been
presented above, others need to be considered when
interpreting the findings of this review. The large hetero-
geneity in the study-specific mediation methods and
estimates reported in the primary studies prevented us
from deriving a single comparable estimate for each vari-
able and reporting on the pooled magnitude of mediation
effects. This variability, as well as the limited number of
studies for each mediator, did not recommend the use of
meta-analytical techniques to pool data across studies. In
this review, we used a narrative synthesis approach includ-
ing vote counting of the number of significant mediation
effects for a given variable in relation to all tests of medi-
ation available for that variable. Although this method
is not as robust as other quantitative approaches to
synthesize data, it provides a reasonably good indication
of whether that variable can be identified as a formal me-
diator (or a variable consistent with mediation) of each
intervention, for each specific outcome. It should also be
considered that in the primary studies included in this re-
view, statistical significance of the mediation effects was
typically the parameter used to infer that a given variable
mediated the intervention effect.
Some studies were characterized by poor methodo-
logical quality, and none of the studies employing formal
mediation analysis presented strong methodological qual-
ity. Nonetheless, for most mediators we did not find an as-
sociation between the methodological quality of the
studies and the direction/strength of the effects reported.
As exceptions, we did find that in the analyses in which
eating disinhibition had consistent significant effects, this
was tested mostly in studies of poor quality. A similar re-
sult was found for self-regulation skills for the long-term
effects in physical activity and dietary intake. Future re-
views would benefit from sensitivity analyses. The diver-
sity of outcome measures, especially for physical activity,
is also a limitation, as different types of physical activity
may be predicted by different factors. The fact that the
coding of study characteristics was based on the descrip-
tion provided in the articles is also limiting, given that in
many cases these descriptions did not provide enough in-
formation regarding mediation analysis, which measures
were used, or the content of the interventions. Future
studies should provide more detail on the content of the
interventions and self-regulation factors addressed to fa-
cilitate data interpretation and inference. The choice of
the year 2000 to start our search was largely arbitrary and
could be seen as a limitation. Finally, the inclusion of non-
controlled trials in some of the analyses could be viewed
as a limiting factor; on balance, we found this an accept-
able compromise (for non-mediation studies only) against
the prospect of altogether excluding several studies from
this review.
These limitations notwithstanding, this study identified
a small number of intervention-related aspects with sup-
porting evidence for an important role played in the diffi-
cult path of successful weight control. Since all evidence
was derived from intervention studies and independent
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 12 of 16
variables were analyzed as to their mediating position in
the behavioral causal chain (although with variable levels
of inference), we believe this is a first step leading to their
formal inclusion in recommendations for lifestyle pro-
grams aiming at weight control. In practical terms, this
could mean that strategies or “behavior change tech-
niques” [107] identified as the most effective to specifically
change these variables (for example, self-efficacy [108] or
autonomous motivation [109]) would be integrated into
future interventions in a widespread fashion, and that
health professionals would be appropriately trained on
how to target them regularly in their practices. It could
also mean that bedside instruments (such as brief ques-
tionnaires or interview items) would be made available for
professionals to quickly assess their patients for these vari-
ables (for example, to assess their body image or level of
self-regulation skill use [1,110]) and tailor interventions to
the most relevant targets for each person. In the area of
motivation enhancement, the techniques and instruments
used in motivational interviewing [111,112] are a good
example of such potential application in medicine and
health care.
Conclusion
In conclusion, based on the scientific literature to date, au-
tonomous motivation, self-efficacy, and self-regulation
skill use emerge as the most promising individual-level
mediators of positive weight outcomes and increased
physical activity. For long-term weight control, promoting
a positive body image and flexible eating control may also
be important. These aspects represent potential entry
points for future lifestyle obesity interventions in adults.
Additional files
Additional file 1: An Example of the Conducted Search (Medline).
Additional file 2: Characteristics of Included Studies With Formal
Mediation Analyses.
Additional file 3: Characteristics of Included Studies Without
Formal Mediation Analyses.
Additional file 4: Indirect effects ’ estimates in studies with formal
mediation analysis.
Additional file 5: EPHPP Quality Assessment Tool (adapted by the
SPOTLIGHT Consortium).
Additional file 6: Complete results for weight change, physical
activity and dietary behaviors.
Additional file 7: Consensus Ratings of Methodological Study
Quality.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PJT, JB, JL, JMO, HR, and IB conceived the study, and PJT and EVC developed
a systematic review protocol. EVC and MM conducted the literature search
and selected the studies based on the title and the abstract. EVC and MM
extracted and coded the data from all studies. Study outcomes were
summarized by PJT, EVC, and MM. They wrote the initial draft of the
manuscript, and JB, JL, JMO, HR, and IB made significant revisions and
contributions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of the SPOTLIGHT project and is funded by the Seventh
Framework Program (CORDIS FP7) of the European Commission, HEALTH
(FP7-HEALTH-2011-two-stage), Grant agreement no. 278186. The content of
this article reflects only the authors ’ views, and the European Commission is
not liable for any use that may be made of the information contained
therein.
Other information
This systematic review is reported in accordance with the PRISMA statement
for reporting systematic reviews [21].
Author details
1Interdisciplinary Centre for the Study of Human Performance (CIPER), Faculty
of Human Kinetics, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. 2European Centre
on Health of Societies in Transition, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, UK. 3Department of Nutrition Pitié-Salpetrière (AP-HP),
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Paris, France. 4UREN (Nutritional
Epidemiology Research Unit), Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Inserm
(U557), Inra (U1125), Cnam, F-93017, Bobigny, France. 5Department of
Movement and Sport Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
6Department of General Practice and Elderly Care, The EMGO Institute for
Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. 7Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The EMGO
Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Received: 12 November 2014 Accepted: 11 March 2015
References
1. Sniehotta FF, Scholz U, Schwarzer R. Bridging the intention-behaviour gap:
planning, self-efficacy, and action control in the adoption and maintenance
of physical exercise. Psychol Health. 2005;20:143 –60.
2. Teixeira PJ, Going SB, Sardinha LB, Lohman TG. A review of psychosocial
pre-treatment predictors of weight control. Obes Rev. 2005;6:43 –65.
3. Maes S, Karoly P. Self-regulation assessment and intervention in physical
health and illness: a review. Appl Psychol Int Rev. 2005;54:267 –99.
4. Bandura A. The primacy of self-regulation in health promotion. Appl Psychol
Health Well Being. 2005;54:245 –54.
5. Ajzen I. From intentions to actions: a theory of planned behavior. In:
Kuhl J, Beckmann J, editors. Action control. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer;
1985. p. 11 –39.
6. Deci EL, Ryan RM. Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human
behavior. New York: Plenum; 1985. p. 113 –48.
7. Heckhausen H, Gollwitzer P. Thought contents and cognitive functioning in
motivational versus volitional states of mind. Motiv Emot. 1987;11:101 –20.
8. Schwarzer R. Modeling health behavior change: how to predict and modify
the adoption and maintenance of health behaviors. Appl Psychol Health
Well Being. 2008;57:1 –29.
9. Carver CS, Scheier MF. On the self-regulation of behavior. New York:
University Press; 1998.
10. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Ard JD, Comuzzie AG, Donato KA, et al.
2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and
obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity
Society. Circulation. 2014;129:S139 –40.
11. Ackermann RT, Finch EA, Brizendine E, Zhou H, Marrero DG. Translating the
diabetes prevention program into the community. The DEPLOY Pilot Study
Am J Prev Med. 2008;35:357 –63.
12. Eriksson MK, Franks PW, Eliasson M. A 3-year randomized trial of lifestyle
intervention for cardiovascular risk reduction in the primary care setting:
the Swedish Björknäs study. PLoS One. 2009;4:e5195.
13. Kinmonth AL, Wareham NJ, Hardeman W, Sutton S, Prevost AT, Fanshawe T,
et al. Efficacy of a theory-based behavioural intervention to increase physical
activity in an at-risk group in primary care (ProActive UK): a randomised trial.
Lancet. 2008;371:41–8.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 13 of 16
14. van Sluijs EMF, van Poppel MNM, van Mechelen W. Stage-based lifestyle
interventions in primary care: are they effective? Am J Prev Med.
2004;26:330–43.
15. Lakerveld J, Bot SD, Chinapaw MJ, van Tulder MW, Kostense PJ, Dekker JM,
et al. Motivational interviewing and problem solving treatment to reduce
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease risk in real life: a randomized
controlled trial. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10:47.
16. Wing RR, Hill JO. Successful weight loss maintenance. Annu Rev Nutr.
2001;21:323–41.
17. Rossner S, Hammarstrand M, Hemmingsson E, Neovius M, Johansson K.
Long-term weight loss and weight-loss maintenance strategies. Obes Rev.
2008;9:624–30.
18. Mata J, Silva MN, Vieira PN, Carraça EV, Andrade AM, Coutinho SR, et al.
Motivational “spill-over” during weight control: increased self-determination
and exercise intrinsic motivation predict eating self-regulation. Health
Psychol. 2009;28:709–16.
19. Lakerveld J, Brug J, Bot S, Teixeira P, Rutter H, Woodward E, et al.
Sustainable prevention of obesity through integrated strategies: the
SPOTLIGHT project’s conceptual framework and design. BMC Public Health.
2012;12:1471–2458.
20. Kraemer HC, Wilson GT, Fairburn CG, Agras WS. Mediators and moderators
of treatment effects in randomized clinical trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2002;59:877–83.
21. Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, Mulrow C, Gøtzsche PC, Ioannidis JP, et al.
The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses
of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration.
PLoS Med. 2009;6:e1000100.
22. Elfhag K, Rossner S. Who succeeds in maintaining weight loss? A conceptual
review of factors associated with weight loss maintenance and weight regain.
Obes Rev. 2005;6:67–85.
23. Friedman MA, Brownell KD. Psychological correlates of obesity: moving to
the next research generation. Psychol Bull. 1995;117:3 –20.
24. Barte J, ter Bogt NC, Bogers RP, Teixeira PJ, Blissmer B, Mori TA, et al.
Maintenance of weight loss after lifestyle interventions for overweight and
obesity, a systematic review. Obes Rev. 2010;11:899 –906.
25. Franz MJ, Van Wormer JJ, Crain AL, Boucher JL, Histon T, Caplan W,
et al. Weight loss outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
weight loss clinical trials with a minimum 1-year follow-up. J Am Diet
Assoc. 2007;107:1755 –67.
26. Curioni CC, Lourenco PM. Long-term weight loss after diet and exercise: a
systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005;29:1168 –74.
27. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni P, Moher D, Oxman AD, et al. The
Cochrane Collaboration ’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials.
Br Med J. 2011;343:d5928.
28. Baron RM, Kenny DA. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations.
J Pers Soc Psychol. 1986;51:1173 –82.
29. MacKinnon DP, Fairchild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol.
2007;58:593–614.
30. Thomas BH, Ciliska D, Dobbins M, Micucci S. A process for systematically
reviewing the literature: providing the research evidence for public health
nursing interventions. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2004;1:176 –84.
31. Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, D ’Amico R, Sowden AJ, Sakarovitch C, Song F, et al.
Evaluating non-randomised intervention studies. Health Technol Assess.
2003;7:iii–x.1–173.
32. Moher D, Cook DJ, Eastwood S, Olkin I, Rennie D, Stroup DF. Improving the
quality of reports of meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials: the
QUOROM statement. Lancet. 1999;354:1896 –900.
33. Mackenbach JD, Rutter H, Compernolle S, Glonti K, Oppert JM, Charreire H,
et al. Obesogenic environments: a systematic review of the association
between the physical environment and adult weight status, the SPOTLIGHT
project. BMC Public Health. 2014;14:233.
34. Lubans DR, Foster C, Biddle S. A review of mediators of behavior in
interventions to promote physical activity among children and adolescents.
Prev Med. 2008;47:463 –70.
35. Rhodes RE, Pfaeffli LA. Mediators of physical activity behaviour change
among adult non-clinical populations: a review update. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act. 2010;7:37 –48.
36. Silva MN, Markland D, Carraça EV, Vieira PN, Coutinho SR, Minderico CS,
et al. Exercise autonomous motivation predicts 3-year weight loss in
women. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2011;43:728 –37.
37. Annesi JJ, Unruh JL, Marti CN, Gorjala S, Tennant G. Effects of the coach
approach intervention on adherence to exercise in obese women:
assessing mediation of social cognitive theory factors. Res Q Exerc Sport.
2011;82:99 –108.
38. Roesch SC, Norman GJ, Villodas F, Sallis JF, Patrick K. Intervention-mediated
effects for adult physical activity: a latent growth curve analysis. Soc Sci
Med. 2010;71:494–501.
39. Teixeira PJ, Silva MN, Coutinho SR, Palmeira AL, Mata J, Vieira PN, et al.
Mediators of weight loss and weight loss maintenance in middle-aged
women. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18:725 –35.
40. Perri MG, Limacher MC, Durning PE, Janicke DM, Lutes LD, Bobroff LB, et al.
Extended-care programs for weight management in rural communities: the
treatment of obesity in underserved rural settings (TOURS) randomized trial.
Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:2347 –54.
41. Burke V, Beilin LB, Cutt HE, Mansour J, Mori TA. Moderators and mediators
of behaviour change in a lifestyle program for treated hypertensives: a
randomized controlled trial (ADAPT). Health Educ Res. 2008;23:583 –91.
42. Silva MN, Markland DM, Vieira PN, Coutinho SR, Carraça EV, Palmeira AL,
et al. Helping overweight women become more active: need support and
motivational regulations for different forms of physical activity. Psychol
Sports Exerc. 2010;11:591 –601.
43. Anderson-Bill ES, Winett RA, Wojcik JR, Williams DM. Aging and the social
cognitive determinants of physical activity behavior and behavior change:
evidence from the Guide to Health trial. J Aging Res. 2011. doi:10.4061/
2011/505928.
44. Palmeira AL, Markland DA, Silva MN, Branco TL, Martins SC, Minderico CS,
et al. Reciprocal effects among changes in weight, body image, and other
psychological factors during behavioral obesity treatment: a mediation
analysis. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2009;6:9.
45. Coughlin JW, Gullion CM, Brantley PJ, Stevens VJ, Bauck A, Champagne CM,
et al. Behavioral mediators of treatment effects in the weight loss
maintenance trial. Ann Behav Med. 2013;46:369 –81.
46. Lee RE, O ’Connor DP, Smith-Ray R, Mama SK, Medina AV, Reese-Smith JY, et al.
Mediating effects of group cohesion on physical activity and diet in women of
color: health is power. Am J Health Promot. 2012;26:e116–25.
47. Annesi JJ, Vaughn LL. Relationship of exercise volume with change in
depression and its association with self-efficacy to control emotional eating
in severely obese women. Adv Prev Med. 2011. doi:104061/2011/514271.
48. Annesi JJ, Gorjala S. Relationship of exercise program participation with
weight loss in adults with severe obesity: assessing psychologically based
mediators. South Med J. 2010;103:1119 –23.
49. Linde JA, Rothman AJ, Baldwin AS, Jeffery RW. The impact of self-efficacy on
behavior change and weight change among overweight participants in a
weight loss trial. Health Psychol. 2006;25:282 –91.
50. Riebe D, Blissmer B, Greene G, Caldwell M, Ruggiero L, Stillwell KM, et al.
Long-term maintenance of exercise and healthy eating behaviors in
overweight adults. Prev Med. 2005;40:769 –78.
51. Gallagher KI, Jakicic JM, Napolitano MA, Marcus BH. Psychosocial factors
related to physical activity and weight loss in overweight women. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2006;38:971 –80.
52. Annesi JJ, Marti CN. Path analysis of exercise treatment-induced changes in
psychological factors leading to weight loss. Psychol Health. 2011;26:1081–98.
53. Annesi JJ. Self-regulatory skills usage strengthens the relations of self-efficacy
for improved eating, exercise, and weight in the severely obese: toward
an explanatory model. Behav Med. 2011;37:71 –6.
54. Annesi JJ. Behaviorally supported exercise predicts weight loss in obese
adults through improvements in mood, self-efficacy, and self-regulation,
rather than by caloric expenditure. Pers J. 2011;15:23 –7.
55. Palmeira AL, Branco TL, Martins SC, Minderico CS, Silva MN, Vieira PN, et al.
Change in body image and psychological well-being during behavioral
obesity treatment: Associations with weight loss and maintenance. Body
Image. 2010;7:187–93.
56. Teixeira PJ, Going SB, Houtkooper LB, Cussler EC, Metcalfe LL, Blew RM, et al.
Exercise motivation, eating, and body image variables as predictors of
weight control. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:179 –88.
57. Annesi JJ. Relations of changes in physical self-appraisal and perceived energy
with weight change in obese women beginning a supported exercise and
nutrition information program. Soc Behav Personal Int J. 2007;35:295–300.
58. Moore SD, King AC, Kiernan M, Gardner CD. Outcome expectations and
realizations as predictors of weight regain among dieters. Eat Behav.
2011;12:60–3.
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 14 of 16
59. Haapala I, Barengo NC, Biggs S, Surakka L, Manninen P. Weight loss by mobile
phone: a 1 year effectiveness study. Public Health Nutr. 2009;12:2382–91.
60. Annesi JJ, Whitaker AC. Weight loss and psychologic gain in obese women -
participants in a supported exercise intervention. The Permanente Journal.
2008;12:36–45.
61. Annesi JJ. Supported exercise improves controlled eating and weight
through its effects on psychosocial factors: extending a systematic research
program toward treatment development. Pers J. 2012;16:7 –18.
62. Karhunen L, Lyly M, Lapveteläinen A, Kolehmainen M, Laaksonen DE,
Lähteenmäki L, Poutanen K. Psychobehavioural factors are more strongly
associated with successful weight management than predetermined satiety
effect or other characteristics of diet. J Obes. 2012. doi:10.1155/2012/274068.
63. Wing RR, Papandonatos G, Fava JL, Gorin AA, Phelan S, McCaffery J, et al.
Maintaining large weight losses: the role of behavioral and psychological
factors. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2008;76:1015 –21.
64. McGuire MT, Jeffery RW, French SA, Hannan PJ. The relationship between
restraint and weight and weight-related behaviors among individuals in a
community weight gain prevention trial. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord.
2001;25:574–80.
65. Burke V, Mansour J, Mori TA, Beilin LB, Cutt HE, Wilson A. Changes in
cognitive measures associated with a lifestyle program for treated
hypertensives: a randomized controlled trial (ADAPT). Health Educ Res.
2008;23:202–17.
66. Warziski MT, Sereika SM, Styn MA, Music E, Burke LE. Changes in self-efficacy
and dietary adherence: the impact on weight loss in the PREFER study.
J Behav Med. 2008;31:81 –92.
67. Annesi JJ, Mareno N. Temporal aspects of psychosocial predictors of increased
fruit and vegetable intake in adults with severe obesity: mediation by physical
activity. J Community Health. 2014;39:454–63.
68. Annesi J. Effects of treatment differences on psychosocial predictors of
exercise and improved eating in obese, middle-age adults. J Phys Act
Health. 2013;10:1024–31.
69. Annesi JJ, Porter KJ. Reciprocal effects of treatment-induced increases in
exercise and improved eating, and their psychosocial correlates, in obese
adults seeking weight loss: a field-based trial. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act.
2013;10:133.
70. Fitzpatrick SL, Bandeen-Roche K, Stevens VJ, Coughlin JW, Rubin RR,
Brantley PJ, et al. Examining the behavioral processes through which
lifestyle interventions promote weight loss: results from the PREMIER Trial.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22:1002 –7.
71. Blair SN, Haskell WL, Ho P, Paffenbager Jr RS, Vranizan KM, Farquhar JW,
et al. Assessment of habitual physical activity by a seven-day recall in a
community survey and controlled experiments. Am J Epidemiol.
1985;122:794–804.
72. Godin G, Shephard RJ. Godin leisure-time exercise questionnaire. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1997;29:S36 –8.
73. Hayes AF. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process
analysis: a regression-based approach. NY: Guilford Press; 2013.
74. Hagger MS. Theoretical integration in health psychology: unifying ideas and
complementary explanations. Br J Health Psychol. 2009;14:189 –94.
75. Michie S, Ashford S, Sniehotta FF, Dombrowski SU, Bishop A, French DP.
A refined taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to help people
change their physical activity and healthy eating behaviours: the CALO-RE
taxonomy. Psychol Health. 2011;26:1479 –98.
76. Cash TF. Cognitive-behavioral perspectives on body image. In: Cash TF,
Pruzinsky T, editors. Body image: a handbook of theory, research, and
clinical practice. New York: Guilford Press; 2002. p. 38 –46.
77. Cash TF. A ‘negative body image ’. In: Cash TF, Pruzinsky T, editors. Body
image: a handbook of theory, research, and clinical practice. New York:
Guilford Press; 2002. p. 269 –76.
78. Avalos L, Tylka TL, Wood-Barcalow N. The body appreciation scale: development
and psychometric evaluation. Body Image. 2005;2:285–97.
79. Cash TF, Melnyk SE, Hrabosky JI. The assessment of body image investment:
an extensive revision of the appearance schemas inventory. Int J Eat Disord.
2004;35:305–16.
80. Verstuyf J, Patrick H, Vansteenkiste M, Teixeira PJ. Motivational dynamics of
eating regulation: a self-determination theory perspective. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act. 2012. 9:21. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-9-21.
81. Pelletier LG, Dion SC. An examination of general and specific motivational
mechanisms for the relations between body dissatisfaction and eating
behaviors. J Soc Clin Psychol. 2007;26:303 –33.
82. Boone L, Soenens B, Braet C. Perfectionism, body dissatisfaction, and
bulimic symptoms: the intervening role of perceived pressure to be thin
and thin ideal internalization. J Soc Clin Psychol. 2011;30:1043 –68.
83. Fabricatore A, Wadden T. Psychological functioning of obese individuals.
Diabetes Spectrum. 2003;16:245 –52.
84. Schwartz MB, Brownell KD. Obesity and body image. Body Image. 2004;1:43 –56.
85. Verstuyf J, Vansteenkiste M, Soenens B. Eating regulation and bulimic
symptoms: the differential correlates of health-focused and appearance-
focused eating regulation. Body Image. 2012;9:108 –17.
86. Thogersen-Ntoumani C, Ntoumanis N, Nikitaras N. Unhealthy weight control
behaviours in adolescent girls: a process model based on self-determination
theory. Psychol Health. 2010;25:535 –50.
87. Pelletier LG, Dion SC, D ’Angelo MS, Reid RD. Why do you regulate what you
eat? Relationships between forms of regulation, eating behaviors, sustained
dietary behavior change, and psychological adjustment. Motiv Emot.
2004;28:245–77.
88. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-regulation and the problem of human autonomy:
does psychology need choice, self-determination, and will? J Pers.
2006;74:1557–85.
89. Deci EL, Ryan RM. The ‘what’ and ‘why’ of goal pursuits: human needs and
the self-determination of behavior. Psychoanal Inq. 2000;11:227 –68.
90. Ng JYY, Ntoumanis N, Thøgersen-Ntoumani C, Deci EL, Ryan RM, Duda JL,
et al. Self-determination theory applied to health contexts: a meta-analysis.
Perspect Psychol Sci. 2012;7:325 –40.
91. Teixeira PJ, Carraça EV, Markland D, Silva MN, Ryan RM. Exercise, physical
activity, and self-determination theory: a systematic review. Int J Behav Nutr
Phys Act. 2012;9:78.
92. Armitage CJ, Conner M. Social cognition models and health behaviour: a
structured review. Psychol Health. 2000;15:173 –89.
93. Williams SL, French DP. What are the most effective intervention techniques
for changing physical activity self-efficacy and physical activity behaviour -
and are they the same? Health Educ Res. 2011;26:308 –22.
94. Bandura A. Self-efficacy: the exercise of control. New York: W.H. Freeman
and Company; 1997.
95. Westenhoefer J. Dietary restraint and disinhibition: is restraint a homogeneous
construct? Appetite. 1991;16:45–55.
96. Bryant EJ, King NA, Blundell JE. Disinhibition: its effects on appetite and
weight regulation. Obes Rev. 2008;9:409 –19.
97. Kashdan TB, Rottenberg J. Psychological flexibility as a fundamental aspect
of health. Clin Psychol Rev. 2010;30:865 –78.
98. McCracken LM. Committed action: an application of the psychological
flexibility model to activity patterns in chronic pain. J Pain. 2013;14:828 –35.
99. Hayes SC, Luoma JB, Bond FW, Masuda A, Lillis J. Acceptance and
commitment therapy: model, processes and outcomes. Behav Res Ther.
2006;44:1–25.
100. Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. Effective techniques
in healthy eating and physical activity interventions: a meta-regression. Health
Psychol. 2009;28:690–701.
101. Hagger MS, Luszczynska A. Implementation intention and action planning
interventions in health contexts: state of the research and proposals for the
way forward. Appl Psychol Health Well Being. 2014;6:1 –47.
102. Sniehotta FF. Towards a theory of intentional behaviour change: plans,
planning, and self-regulation. Br J Health Psychol. 2009;14:261 –73.
103. Hagger M, Chatzisarantis N. An integrated behavior change model for
physical activity. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2014;42:62 –9.
104. D ’Angelo ME, Pelletier LG, Reid RD, Huta V. The roles of self-efficacy and
motivation in the prediction of short- and long-term adherence to exercise
among patients with coronary heart disease. Health Psychol. 2014;33:1344–53.
105. Carraça EV, Silva MN, Markland D, Vieira PN, Minderico CS, Sardinha LB, et al.
Body image change and improved eating self-regulation in a weight management
intervention in women. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2011;8:75–85.
106. Leong SL, Madden C, Gray A, Horwath C. Self-determined, autonomous
regulation of eating behavior is related to lower body mass index in a
nationwide survey of middle-aged women. J Acad Nutr Diet.
2012;112:1337–46.
107. Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, Abraham C, Francis J, Hardeman W,
et al. The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically
clustered techniques: building an international consensus for the reporting
of behavior change interventions. Ann Behav Med. 2013;46:81 –95.
108. Olander EK, Fletcher H, Williams S, Lou A, Turner A, French DP. What are the
most effective techniques in changing obese individuals ’ physical activity
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 15 of 16
self-efficacy and behaviour: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10:29.
109. Su Y-L, Reeve J. A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of intervention programs
designed to support autonomy. Educ Psychol Rev. 2011;23:159–88.
110. Janssen V, Gucht V, Exel H, Maes S. A self-regulation lifestyle program
for post-cardiac rehabilitation patients has long-term effects on exercise
adherence. J Behav Med. 2014;37:308 –21.
111. Miller W, Rollnick S. Motivational interviewing: helping people change. 3rd
ed. NY: The Guilford Press; 2012.
112. Moyers TB, Martin T, Manuel JK, Hendrickson SM, Miller WR. Assessing
competence in the use of motivational interviewing. J Subst Abuse Treat.
2005;28:19–26.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Teixeira et al. BMC Medicine  (2015) 13:84 Page 16 of 16