The prevalence of adult overweight and obesity as 
defined using BMI has increased worldwide since the 
1980s, with no country demonstrating any successful 
declines in the 33 years of recorded data 1. Obesity is a 
major public health problem worldwide2 and reliance on 
measurements of BMI alone has proven inadequate to 
help clinicians assess and manage obesity- related health 
risk in their patients. For instance, although many indi-
viduals with overweight or obesity will develop cardio-
metabolic health complications such as type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) and cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
during their lifetimes, a sizeable minority will remain 
free of these chronic diseases, a phenomenon that has 
been described as metabolically healthy obesity (MHO).
The prevalence of MHO among adults varies greatly 
between studies owing to differences in age, ethnicity 
and environmental factors, as well as the lack of a uni-
versal definition of metabolic health and a universal 
classification system for obesity
3. Furthermore, studies 
with long- term follow- up periods have generally found 
that MHO is often a temporary or transition state for 
most individuals with obesity. For example, in a study 
with a 20-year follow- up, approximately half of adults 
with MHO (defined in this study as having less than two 
cardiometabolic parameters that fall outside of healthy 
ranges) became metabolically unhealthy by the end 
of the study. Moreover, study participants with MHO 
were at increased risk of cardiovascular events after 
long- term follow- up
4. Similarly, a study considering the 
full range of possible definitions for MHO suggested 
that the risk of a cardiovascular event associated with 
the MHO phenotype increased with longer follow-  up 
times. Furthermore, similar CVD risk estimates were 
observed when MHO was defined by criteria other than 
the absence of the metabolic syndrome
5. Despite the 
fact that the limitations of BMI as an index for obesity 
Waist circumference as a vital sign 
in clinical practice: a Consensus 
Statement from the IAS and ICCR 
Working Group on Visceral Obesity
Robert Ross  1*, Ian J. Neeland2, Shizuya Yamashita3, Iris Shai4, Jaap Seidell5, 
Paolo Magni6,7, Raul D. Santos8,9, Benoit Arsenault  2,10, Ada Cuevas11, Frank B. Hu12, 
Bruce A. Griffin13, Alberto Zambon14, Philip Barter15, Jean- Charles Fruchart16, 
Robert H. Eckel17, Yuji Matsuzawa18 and Jean-Pierre Després  10,19
Abstract | Despite decades of unequivocal evidence that waist circumference provides both 
independent and additive information to BMI for predicting morbidity and risk of death, this 
measurement is not routinely obtained in clinical practice. This Consensus Statement proposes 
that measurements of waist circumference afford practitioners with an important opportunity  
to improve the management and health of patients. We argue that BMI alone is not sufficient to 
properly assess or manage the cardiometabolic risk associated with increased adiposity in adults 
and provide a thorough review of the evidence that will empower health practitioners and 
professional societies to routinely include waist circumference in the evaluation and management 
of patients with overweight or obesity. We recommend that decreases in waist circumference are 
a critically important treatment target for reducing adverse health risks for both men and women. 
Moreover, we describe evidence that clinically relevant reductions in waist circumference can be 
achieved by routine, moderate- intensity exercise and/or dietary interventions. We identify gaps 
in the knowledge, including the refinement of waist circumference threshold values for a given 
BMI category , to optimize obesity risk stratification across age, sex and ethnicity. We recommend 
that health professionals are trained to properly perform this simple measurement and consider  
it as an important ‘vital sign’ in clinical practice.
*e- mail: rossr@queensu.ca
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41574-019-0310-7
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 177
CONSeNSuS
Statement
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy

have been known for decades, several obesity guidelines 
worldwide remain steadfast in the recommendation that 
BMI alone be the measure to characterize obesity- related 
morbidity and risk of death6–9.
The failure of BMI to fully capture cardiometabolic 
risk is partially related to the fact that BMI in isolation is 
an insufficient biomarker of abdominal adiposity. Waist 
circumference is a simple method to assess abdomi-
nal adiposity that is easy to standardize and clinically 
apply. Waist circumference is strongly associated with 
all- cause
10,11 and cardiovascular mortality12,13 with or with-
out adjustment for BMI10,14. However, the full strength of 
the association between waist circumference with mor-
bidity and mortality is realized only after adjustment for 
BMI
10,15,16. Thus, waist circumference enables a further 
refinement of the adverse health risk charac  terized by 
BMI and this measurement should be included when 
stratifying obesity- related health risk. Indeed, resistance 
to the routine inclusion of waist circumference in clin-
ical practice not only ignores the evidence of its utility, 
but fails to take advantage of opportunities to counsel 
patients regarding the higher- risk phenotype of obesity. 
In addition, the measurement of both BMI and waist cir-
cumference will provide unique opportunities to follow 
the utility of treatment and effectiveness of interventions 
designed to manage obesity and related metabolic disease.
In 2017, the International Atherosclerosis Society 
(IAS) and International Chair on Cardiometabolic Risk 
(ICCR) Working Group on Visceral Obesity convened 
in Prague, Czech Republic, to discuss the importance of 
abdominal obesity as a risk factor for premature athero-
sclerosis and CVD in adults (Supplementary Information).  
The group agreed to work on the develop ment of con-
sensus documents which would reflect the position of 
the two organizations. In this Consensus Statement, we 
summarize the evidence that BMI alone is not sufficient 
to properly assess, evaluate or manage the cardiometa-
bolic risk associated with increased adiposity and 
recommend that waist circumference be adopted as a 
routine measurement in clinical practice alongside BMI 
to classify obesity.
Methodology
This Consensus Statement is designed to provide 
the consensus of the IAS and ICCR Working Group 
(Supplementary Information) on waist circumference 
as an anthropometric measure that improves patient 
management. The Consensus Statement was developed 
as follows. The first face- to-face meeting occurred on 
24 April 2017 to review the high- quality evidence avail-
able and known to the subject experts. After discussion 
and deliberation amongst the experts regarding the con-
text and quality of the evidence, an executive writing 
group (R.R., I.J.N., J.-P .D., J.S. and Y .M.) was appointed 
and tasked with writing the first draft. The draft was sub-
sequently circulated to all authors for critical revision of 
intellectual content pertinent to each authors’ expertise. 
High- quality published literature that became avail-
able after the initial face- to-face meeting (through June 
2019) was identified by all authors and reviewed by the 
executive writing group for inclusion in the manuscript. 
The first author coordinated the final preparation and 
submission of the Consensus Statement after the group 
achieved consensus and approved its content.
Historical perspective
The importance of body fat distribution as a risk factor 
for several diseases (for example, CVD, hypertension, 
stroke and T2DM) and mortality has been recognized 
for several decades. In 1956, Jean Vague was the first to 
show the importance of fat distribution in relation 
to various diseases, describing what he termed ‘android’ 
and ‘gynoid’ types of obesity
17. These classifications were 
later interpreted by Ahmed Kissebah and colleagues as 
upper versus lower body fat accumulation as reflected 
by a high or low waist–hip circumference ratio (WHR), 
respectively
18. The upper and lower body fat accumu-
lation phenotypes were based on body morphology 
as assessed by external anthropometric measures such as  
skinfolds and circumferences.
The WHR increased in popularity when epidemio-
logists in the USA and Sweden showed that WHR, 
separately or in combination with BMI, was associated 
with increased risk of death, CVD and T2DM
19–22, find-
ings that were subsequently confirmed in many studies. 
However, later evidence indicated that, compared with 
the WHR, waist circumference alone was more strongly 
associated with the absolute amount of intra- abdominal 
or visceral fat, the fat depot that conveys the strongest 
health risk
23,24. Furthermore, when a ratio such as WHR 
is used to follow changes in regional adipose depots, the 
utility of the ratio is limited when both the numerator 
and denominator values change in response to treatment. 
Consequently, the combination of WHR and BMI for 
Author addresses
1School of Kinesiology and health Studies, School of medicine, Department of 
endocrinology and metabolism, Queen’s university, Kingston, oN, canada.
2Department of Internal medicine, Division of cardiology, university of Texas 
Southwestern medical center, Dallas, TX, uSa.
3Departments of cardiovascular medicine and community medicine, osaka university 
Graduate School of medicine, osaka, Japan.
4Faculty of health Sciences, Ben- Gurion university of the Negev, Beer- Sheva, Israel.
5Department of health Sciences and the emGo Institute for health and care research, 
vu university amsterdam, amsterdam, Netherlands.
6Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, universita’ degli Studi di 
milano, milan, Italy.
7Scientific Institute for research, hospitalization and health care (IrccS) multimedica, 
Sesto San Giovanni, Italy.
8lipid clinic heart Institute (Incor), university of São Paulo, medical School hospital,  
São Paulo, Brazil.
9hospital Israelita albert einstein, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
10Department of Kinesiology, Faculty of medicine, université laval, Québec, Qc, canada.
11Department of clinical Nutrition and metabolism, clínica las condes, Santiago, chile.
12Departments of Nutrition and epidemiology, harvard T.h. chan School of Public health, 
Boston, ma, uSa.
13Department of Nutritional Sciences, university of Surrey, Guildford, uK.
14Department of medicine - DImeD, university of Padua, Padova, Italy.
15School of medical Sciences, university of New South Wales australia, Sydney,  
NSW, australia.
16Fondation cœur et artères, lille, France.
17Division of endocrinology, metabolism and Diabetes, and Division of cardiology, 
anschutz university of colorado School of medicine, aurora, co, uSa.
18Department of endocrinology and metabolism, Sumitomo hospital, osaka, Japan.
19Department of medicine, Faculty of medicine, université laval, Québec, Qc, canada.
178 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement

assessing obesity risk were replaced by single threshold 
values for waist circumference alone25. The NIH was the 
first to use the threshold values for waist circumference 
(≥88 cm in women and ≥102 cm in men) as suggested 
by Michael Lean and colleagues, in combination with 
a classification of overall obesity as assessed by BMI 25. 
Although the use of these specific waist circumference 
values to identify white adults with abdominal obesity 
remains a cornerstone of obesity guidelines worldwide, 
we present evidence to challenge the supportive ration-
ale and provide evidence in support of alternative waist 
circumference values to be used in concert with BMI.
As an alternative to measurements of waist circum-
ference, the WHR or waist–thigh circumference ratio, 
Margaret Ashwell and others proposed the waist–height 
ratio as a measure of abdominal obesity
26,27. Compared 
with the previous measurements, the waist–height ratio 
shows similar and sometimes slightly stronger associa-
tions with the risk of CVD or T2DM
28,29. An explanation 
for why adding height increases the prediction of disease 
risk might be because short stature is associated with 
increased risk of CVD30. In growing children and ado-
lescents, the waist–height ratio could be more useful for 
the classification of abdominal obesity than waist cir -
cumference alone. However, in fully grown adults, the 
waist–height ratio is less useful as height is generally 
fixed and the value can only be altered by changes in 
waist circumference. Moreover, height is only margin-
ally associated with waist circumference
31. For the assess-
ment of the effectiveness of lifestyle changes in adults, 
waist circumference might be preferred as a simple tool. 
Other alternatives to waist circumference have included 
the conicity index
32 and the abdominal obesity index33, 
but they are, at best, only slightly better predictors of 
disease risk than waist circumference alone.
Prevalence of abdominal obesity
Despite a strong association between waist circumference 
and BMI at the population level, emerging evidence sug-
gests that, across populations, waist circumference might 
be increasing beyond what is expected according to BMI. 
In other words, the phenotype of obesity might be chang-
ing over time to one that reflects an increase in abdomi-
nal adiposity
34. For example, Ian Janssen and colleagues 
examined the changes in waist circumference for a given 
BMI over a 30-year period in a Canadian sample
35. 
Notably, for a given BMI, Canadians had a larger waist 
circumference in 2007 compared with 1981. Specifically, 
the researchers observed a waist circum  ference that 
was greater by 1.1 cm in men and 4.9 cm in women for 
a BMI of 25 kg/m
2 between 1981 and 2007. Similarly, 
Sandra Albrecht and colleagues examined the secular 
changes in waist circumference in the USA (1988–2007), 
England (1992–2008), China (1993–2011) and Mexico 
(1999–2012)
36 and reported statistically signi ficantly 
increased waist circumference values relative to BMI in 
all countries studied and in most subpopulations.
These observations are consistent with those of 
Tommy Visscher and colleagues, who performed an 
extensive review and concluded that the majority of the 
evidence suggests a trend in which the relative increases 
in waist circumference were larger than the relative 
increases in BMI37. This observation is seemingly inde-
pendent of age, sex and ethnicity, as few groups failed to 
demonstrate the general trend of secular waist circum-
ference increasing beyond that expected by BMI (Fig.  1). 
The failure of BMI to detect such an increase in abdomi-
nal obesity confirms the limitations of BMI alone to iden-
tify the phenotype of obesity that conveys the greatest 
health risk.
Conclusions and recommendations — prevalence of 
abdominal obesity. 
•	 Although the prevalence of obesity measured by BMI 
might have plateaued in some countries, the prev-
alence of abdominal obesity as measured by waist 
circumference is generally increasing.
•	 The lack of inclusion of waist circumference in global 
obesity surveillance might inadequately characterize 
the health risk associated with the global obesity prev-
alence, as it seems that the prevalence of abdominal 
obesity is increasing.
•	 Current obesity prevalence trends based on BMI 
alone should be interpreted with caution. We recom-
mend that serious consideration should be given 
to the inclusion of waist circumference in obesity 
surveillance studies.
Identifying the high- risk obesity phenotype
Waist circumference, BMI and health outcomes — 
categorical analysis. It is not surprising that waist cir-
cumference and BMI alone are positively associated with 
morbidity
15 and mortality13 independent of age, sex and 
ethnicity, given the strong association between these 
anthropometric variables across cohorts. However, it is 
also well established that, for any given BMI, the vari-
ation in waist circumference is considerable, and, in any 
given BMI category, adults with higher waist circum-
ference values are at increased adverse health risk com-
pared with those with a lower waist circumference
38–40. 
This observation is well illustrated by James Cerhan 
and colleagues, who pooled data from 11 prospective 
cohort studies with 650,386 white adults from the USA, 
Australia and Sweden aged 20–83 years
11. In this study, 
the authors observed that waist circumference was 
positively associated with mortality within every BMI 
category examined, from 20 kg/m2 to 50 kg/m2. This 
finding is consistent with that of Ellen de Hollander 
and colleagues, who performed a meta- analysis involv-
ing over 58,000 predominantly white older adults from 
around the world and reported that the age- adjusted and 
smoking- adjusted mortality was substantially greater for 
those with an elevated waist circumference within nor-
mal weight, overweight and obese categories as defined 
by BMI
41. The ability of waist circumference to add to the 
adverse health risk observed within a given BMI category 
provides the basis for the current classification system 
used to characterize obesity- related health risk8,42.
Waist circumference, BMI and health outcomes — 
continuous analysis. Despite the observation that the 
association between waist circumference and adverse 
health risk varies across BMI categories
11, current 
obesity- risk classification systems recommend using the 
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 179
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement

same waist circumference threshold values for all BMI 
categories42. We propose that important information 
about BMI and waist circumference is lost when they are 
converted from continuous to broad categorical variables 
and that this loss of information affects the manner in 
which BMI and waist circumference predict morbidity 
and mortality. Specifically, when BMI and waist circum-
ference are considered as categorical variables in the same 
risk prediction model, they are both positively related to  
morbidity and mortality
38. However, when BMI and waist  
circumference are considered as continuous variables 
in the same risk prediction model, risk prediction by 
waist circumference improves, whereas the association 
between BMI and adverse health risk is weakened
10,43. 
The full strength of the association between waist cir -
cumference with morbidity and/or mortality is not fully 
realized until adjustment for BMI
11,12,41.
Evidence in support of adjusting waist circumference 
for BMI comes from Janne Bigaard and colleagues who 
report that a strong association exists between waist 
circumference and all- cause mortality after adjustment 
for BMI
43. For example, a 10% larger waist circumfer -
ence corresponded to a 1.48 (95% CI 1.36–1.61) times 
higher mortality over the whole range of waist circum-
ference in both men and women after adjustment for 
BMI. This observation was confirmed by Tobias Pischon 
and colleagues, who observed that the highest quintile 
of waist circumference (≥102.7 cm in men and ≥89.0 cm 
in women) was associated with an increased risk of  
all- cause death of 1.33 (95% CI 1.24–1.44) before BMI 
adjustment, with an increased risk of death of 2.05 
(95% CI 1.80–2.33) after adjustment for BMI
10.
Consistent with observations based on asymptomatic 
adults, Thais Coutinho and colleagues report similar 
observations for a cohort of 14,284 adults with CVD who 
were followed up for 2.3 years (5,696 deaths). The cohort 
was divided into tertiles for both waist circumference and 
BMI. In comparison with the lowest waist circumference 
tertile, a significant association with risk of death was 
observed for the highest tertile for waist circumference 
after adjustment for age, sex, smoking, diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension and BMI (HR 1.29, 95% CI 1.20–1.39). By 
contrast, after adjustment for age, sex, smoking, diabetes 
mellitus, hypertension and waist circumference, increas-
ing tertiles of BMI were inversely associated with risk of 
death (HR 0.64, 95% CI 0.59–0.69)
44.
The findings from this systematic review 44 are par-
tially confirmed by Diewertje Sluik and colleagues, 
who examined the relationships between waist circum-
ference, BMI and survival in 5,435 individuals with 
T2DM over 4.6 years of follow- up (interquartile range 
2.0–9.8 years)
45. In this prospective cohort study, the 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Change in prevalence (%)
MFMFMFMFMFMFMFMF
Okosun
1962–2000
Lahti-Koski
1987–2002
Gearon
1989–2012
Liese
1990–1995
Xi
1993–2009
Czernichow
1995–2005
Barzin
1999–2011
Ford and Ogden
2004–2012
Change in abdominal obesity prevalence
Change in general obesity prevalence
Fig. 1 | The prevalence of abdominal obesity and obesity measured in different studies. Changes in the prevalence of 
abdominal obesity (measured using waist circumference) and general obesity (measured using BMI) measured in different 
studies during the time period indicated on the x axis. General obesity was defined as BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2. Abdominal obesity 
was defined as waist circumference ≥ 88 cm and ≥ 102 cm for women and men, respectively. However, Xi et al. defined 
general obesity as BMI ≥ 28 kg/m2 and abdominal obesity as waist circumference ≥ 80 cm and ≥ 85 cm for Chinese women 
and men, respectively113. In addition, Barzin et al. defined general obesity as BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2 and abdominal obesity as  
waist circumference ≥ 91 cm and ≥ 89 cm for Iranian women and men, respectively114. Y ears given (for example, 1999–2011) 
indicate the years in which data were collected. F , female; M, male. Data are from reFs 37,113–121.
180 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement

cohort was divided into quintiles for both BMI and 
waist circumference. After adjustment for T2DM dura-
tion, insulin treatment, prevalent myocardial infarction, 
stroke, cancer, smoking status, smoking duration, educa-
tional level, physical activity, alcohol consumption and 
BMI, the HR for risk of death associated with the highest 
tertile was 2.11 (95% CI 1.23–3.61) in comparison with 
the lowest waist circumference quintile. By contrast, in 
comparison with the lowest quintile for BMI (adjusted 
for the same variables, with waist circumference replac-
ing BMI), the HR for risk of death for the highest BMI 
quintile was 0.33 (95% CI 0.19–0.60). In summary, when 
associations between waist circumference and BMI with 
morbidity and mortality are considered in continuous 
models, for a given waist circumference, the higher the 
BMI the lower the adverse health risk.
Why the association between waist circumference 
and adverse health risk is increased following adjust-
ment for BMI is not established. It is possible that the 
health protective effect of a larger BMI for a given waist 
circumference is explained by an increased accumula-
tion of subcutaneous adipose tissue in the lower body
46. 
For example, in a study of >2,000 older participants 
from the Health, Ageing and Body Composition study, 
Marieke Snijder and colleagues were among the first 
to report that thigh adipose tissue mass is negatively 
associated with glucose intolerance and dyslipidaemia, 
after accounting for abdominal adipose tissue mass
47. 
This observation was confirmed by Sophie Eastwood and 
colleagues, who reported that in South Asian adults the  
protective effects of total subcutaneous adipose tissue for 
T2DM and HbA1c levels emerge only after accounting  
for visceral adipose tissue (V AT) accumulation48.
A causal mechanism has not been established that 
explains the attenuation in morbidity and mortality 
associated with increased lower body adiposity for a 
given level of abdominal obesity. We suggest that the 
increased capacity to store excess energy consumption 
in the gluteal–femoral subcutaneous adipocytes might 
protect against excess lipid deposition in V AT and ectopic 
depots such as the liver, the heart and the skeletal muscle 
(Fig.  2). Thus, for a given waist circumference, a larger 
BMI might represent a phenotype with elevations in 
lower body subcutaneous adipose tissue. Alternatively, 
adults with elevations in BMI for a given waist circumfer-
ence could have decreased amounts of V AT. Excess lipid 
accumulation in V AT and ectopic depots is associated 
with increased cardiometabolic risk
47–49. Moreover, V AT is 
an established marker of morbidity50,51 and mortality24,52. 
These findings provide a plausible mechanism by which 
lower values for BMI or hip circumference for a given 
waist circumference would increase adverse health risk.
Healthy cardiometabolic proﬁle Cardiometabolic risk
Energy surplus
FFA buﬀering
(no spillover)
Healthy 
adipokine 
secretion
FFA spillover
Dysfunctional
adipokine 
secretion
Functional SAT Dysfunctional SAT
/uni2191 Lipolysis
/uni2191 'Bad’ adipokines
/uni2193 Glucose
    uptake
/uni2193 Insulin
    secr etion
/uni2191 /uni03B2-Cell 
    death
/uni2191 Heart 
    cell 
    death
/uni2191 Glucose 
    pr oduction
/uni2191 VLDL
/uni2193 Insulin
    clear ance 
Abdominal cavity Muscle LiverP ancr eas Heart
Fig. 2 | Overview of potential role of functional and dysfunctional adipose tissue contributing to increased 
cardiometabolic risk. The ability of subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) to expand through hyperplasia (generation of new 
fat cells) allows the safe storage of the excess energy from the diet into a properly expanding subcutaneous ‘metabolic 
sink’. When this process becomes saturated or in situations where adipose tissue has a limited ability to expand, there is  
a spillover of the excess energy , which must be stored in visceral adipose tissue as well as in normally lean organs such as 
the skeletal muscle, the liver, the pancreas and the heart, a process described as ectopic fat deposition. Visceral adiposity 
is associated with a hyperlipolytic state resistant to the effect of insulin along with an altered secretion of adipokines 
including inflammatory cytokines whereas a set of metabolic dysfunctions are specifically associated with increased 
skeletal muscle, liver, pancreas, and epicardial, pericardial and intra- myocardial fat. FFA , free fatty acid.
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 181
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement

This notion is reinforced by Jennifer Kuk and col-
leagues who reported that BMI is an independent and 
positive correlate of V AT in adults before adjustment for 
waist circumference; however, BMI is negatively associ-
ated with V AT mass after adjustment for waist circumfer-
ence
53. This study also reported that, after adjustment for 
waist circumference, BMI was positively associated with 
lower body subcutaneous adipose tissue mass and skel-
etal muscle mass. These observations support the puta-
tive mechanism described above and, consequently, that 
the negative association commonly observed between 
BMI and morbidity and mortality after adjustment for 
waist circumference might be explained by a decreased 
deposition of lower body subcutaneous adipose tissue 
and muscle mass, an increased accumulation of visceral 
adiposity, or both.
In summary, the combination of BMI and waist cir-
cumference can identify the highest- risk phenotype of 
obesity far better than either measure alone. Although 
guidelines for the management of obesity from sev-
eral professional societies recognize the importance of 
measuring waist circumference, in the context of risk 
stratification for future cardiometabolic morbidity and 
mortality, these guidelines limit the recommendation to 
measure waist circumference to adults defined by BMI 
to have overweight or obesity. On the basis of the obser-
vations described in this section, waist circumference 
could be just as important, if not more informative, in 
persons with lower BMI, where an elevated waist cir -
cumference is more likely to signify visceral adiposity 
and increased cardiometabolic risk. This observation is 
particularly true for older adults
54.
Conclusions and recommendations — identifying the 
high- risk obesity phenotype. 
•	 In categorical analyses, waist circumference is associ-
ated with health outcomes within all BMI categories 
independent of sex and age.
•	 When BMI and waist circumference are considered 
as continuous variables in the same risk predic-
tion model, waist circumference remains a positive 
predictor of risk of death, but BMI is unrelated or 
negatively related to this risk.
•	 The strength of the association between waist cir -
cumference and morbidity and/or mortality is not 
fully realized until after adjustment for BMI.
•	 The improved ability of waist circumference to predict 
health outcomes over BMI might be at least partially 
explained by the ability of waist circumference to 
identify adults with increased V AT mass.
•	 We recommend that measurements of waist circum-
ference and BMI should become a standard part of 
clinical encounters (that is, an accepted ‘vital sign’).
Importance in clinical settings
For practitioners, the decision to include a novel meas-
ure in clinical practice is driven in large part by two 
important, yet very different questions. The first centres 
on whether the measure or biomarker improves risk 
prediction in a specific population for a specific dis-
ease. For example, does the addition of a new risk factor 
improve the prognostic performance of an established 
risk prediction algorithm, such as the Pooled Cohort 
Equations (PCE) or Framingham Risk Score (FRS) in 
adults at risk of CVD? The second question is concerned 
with whether improvement in the new risk marker would 
lead to a corresponding reduction in risk of, for example, 
cardiovascular events. In many situations, even if a bio-
marker does not add to risk prediction, it can still serve 
as an excellent target for risk reduction. Here we con-
sider the importance of waist circumference in clinical  
settings by addressing these two questions.
Risk prediction. The evaluation of the utility of any bio-
marker, such as waist circumference, for risk prediction 
requires a thorough understanding of the epidemiolog-
ical context in which the risk assessment is evaluated. 
In addition, several statistical benchmarks need to be 
met in order for the biomarker to improve risk predic-
tion beyond traditional measures. These criteria are 
especially important for waist circumference, as estab-
lished sex- specific and ethnicity-specific differences 
exist in waist circumference threshold levels
55,56. In 2009, 
the American Heart Association published a scientific 
statement on the required criteria for the evaluation of 
novel risk markers of CVD
57, followed by recommen-
dations for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymp-
tomatic adults in 2010 (re F.58). Novel biomarkers must 
at the very least have an independent statistical associ-
ation with health risk, after accounting for established 
risk markers in the context of a multivariable epidemio-
logical model. This characteristic alone is insufficient, 
however, as many novel biomarkers meet this minimum  
standard yet do not meaningfully improve risk predic-
tion beyond traditional markers. More stringent bench-
marks have therefore been developed to assess biomarker  
utility, which include 
calibration , discrimination 58 and 
net reclassification improvement59. Therefore, to critically 
evaluate waist circumference as a novel biomarker for 
use in risk prediction algorithms, these stringent criteria 
need to be applied.
Numerous studies demonstrate a statistical associ-
ation between waist circumference and mortality and 
morbidity in epidemiological cohorts. For example, a sys-
tematic review and meta-regression analysis of 18 studies 
comprising >680,000 European participants with up to 
24 years of follow- up demonstrated that waist circumfer-
ence was associated with increased all-cause death above 
values of 95 cm for men and 80 cm for women
60. Notably, 
increased waist circumference above these thresholds was 
associated with increased relative risk of all-cause death, 
even among those with normal BMI (20.0–24.9 kg/m2)60.  
In the USA, prospective follow- up over 9 years of 14,699 
black, white and mixed ethnicity participants in the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study showed that 
waist circumference was associated with increased risk 
of coronary heart disease (553 events; RR 1.37, 95% CI 
1.21–1.56) but not with all- cause death
61.
Despite the existence of a robust statistical associ-
ation with all- cause death independent of BMI, there 
is no solid evidence that addition of waist circumfer -
ence to standard cardiovascular risk models (such as 
FRS62 or PCE 63) improves risk prediction using more 
stringent statistical benchmarks. For example, a study 
Calibration
The ability to correctly predict 
the proportion of participants 
in a given group who will 
experience an event.
Discrimination
The probability of a diagnostic 
test or risk prediction 
instrument to distinguish 
between higher and lower risk.
Net reclassification 
improvement
The relative increase in the 
predicted probabilities for 
individuals who experience 
events and the decrease for 
individuals who do not.
182 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement

evaluating the utility of the PCE across WHO- defined 
classes of obesity42 in five large epidemiological cohorts 
comprised of ~25,000 individuals assessed whether 
risk discrimination of the PCE would be improved by 
including the obesity- specific measures BMI and waist 
circumference64. The researchers found that although 
each measure was individually associated (BMI: HR 1.04, 
95% CI 1.02–1.07; waist circumference: HR 1.11, 95% CI  
1.09–1.13 per 1 SD increase) with increased risk of athero-
sclerotic CVD, no significant improvement occurred in 
the 
c- statistic with the addition of either BMI or waist 
circumference to the other PCE variables 64. Similarly,  
a pooled analysis of four French population studies 
including >20,000 participants assessed the utility of addi-
tional risk factors when added to the FRS for 10-year 
coronary heart disease risk prediction
65. The researchers 
found that BMI (P = 0.03) but not waist circumference 
(P = 0.42) remained associated with risk of coronary 
heart disease when added to FRS, but the addition of 
either factor did not improve model discrimination
65.
On the basis of these observations alone, one might 
conclude that the measure of waist circumference in 
clinical settings is not supported as risk prediction is 
not improved. However, Nancy Cook and others have 
demonstrated how difficult it is for the addition of any 
biomarker to substantially improve prognostic perfor-
mance
59,66–68. Indeed, Michael Pencina and colleagues 
estimated that the nonmodifiable risk factors of age, sex 
and ethnicity capture 63–80% of the prognostic perfor-
mance of cardiovascular risk models, and that adding 
systolic blood pressure, plasma levels of non- HDL cho-
lesterol, diabetes mellitus or smoking to a model with 
other risk factors increases prognostic performance as 
measured by the c- statistic by only 0.004–0.013 
(reF .69). 
Furthermore, any additive value of waist circumference 
to risk prediction algorithms could be overwhelmed by 
more proximate, downstream causative risk factors such 
as elevated blood pressure and abnormal plasma concen-
trations of glucose. In other words, waist circumference 
might not improve prognostic performance as, indepen-
dent of BMI, waist circumference is a principal driver of 
alterations in downstream cardiometabolic risk factors.  
A detailed discussion of the merits of different approaches 
(for example, c- statistic, net reclassification index and dis-
crimination index) to determine the utility of novel bio-
markers to improve risk prediction is beyond the scope of 
this article and the reader is encouraged to review recent 
critiques to gain insight on this important issue
66,69.
Risk reduction. Whether the addition of waist circum-
ference improves the prognostic performance of estab-
lished risk algorithms is a clinically relevant question 
that remains to be answered; however, the effect of tar-
geting waist circumference on morbidity and mortality 
is an entirely different issue of equal or greater clinical 
relevance. Several examples exist in the literature where  
a risk marker might improve risk prediction but modify-
ing the marker clinically does not impact risk reduction. 
For example, a low level of HDL cholesterol is a central 
risk factor associated with the risk of coronary artery 
disease in multiple risk prediction algorithms, yet raising 
plasma levels of HDL cholesterol pharmacologically has 
not improved CVD outcomes
70. Conversely, a risk factor 
might not meaningfully improve statistical risk predic-
tion but can be an important modifiable target for risk 
reduction. Indeed, we argue that, at any BMI value, waist 
circumference is a major driver of the deterioration 
in cardiometabolic risk markers or factors and, conse-
quently, that reducing waist circumference is a critical 
step towards reducing cardiometabolic disease risk.
As we described earlier, waist circumference is well 
established as an independent predictor of morbidity and 
mortality, and the full strength of waist circumference 
is realized after controlling for BMI. We suggest that 
the association between waist circumference and hard 
clinical end points is explained in large measure by the 
association between changes in waist circumference and 
corresponding cardiometabolic risk factors. For example, 
evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) has 
consistently revealed that, independent of sex and age, 
lifestyle- induced reductions in waist circumference are 
associated with improvements in cardiometabolic risk 
factors with or without corresponding weight loss
71–76. 
These observations remain consistent regardless of 
whether the reduction in waist circumference is induced 
by energy restriction (that is, caloric restriction)73,75,77 or 
an increase in energy expenditure (that is, exercise)71,73–75. 
We have previously argued that the conduit between 
change in waist circumference and cardiometabolic risk 
is visceral adiposity, which is a strong marker of cardio-
metabolic risk
24. Taken together, these observations high-
light the critical role of waist circumference reduction 
through lifestyle behaviours in downstream reduction in 
morbidity and mortality (Fig.  3).
In summary, whether waist circumference adds to the 
prognostic performance of cardiovascular risk models 
awaits definitive evidence. However, waist circumfer -
ence is now clearly established as a key driver of altered 
levels of cardiometabolic risk factors and markers. 
Consequently, reducing waist circumference is a criti-
cal step in cardiometabolic risk reduction, as it offers a 
pragmatic and simple target for managing patient risk.
Conclusions and recommendations — waist circumference 
and risk prediction. 
•	 The combination of BMI and waist circumference 
identifies a high- risk obesity phenotype better than 
either measure alone.
•	 We recommend that waist circumference should be 
measured in clinical practice as it is a key driver of 
risk; for example, many patients have altered CVD 
risk factors because they have abdominal obesity.
•	 Waist circumference is a critical factor that can be 
used to measure the reduction in CVD risk after the 
adoption of healthy behaviours.
A highly responsive vital sign
Evidence from several reviews and meta- analyses con-
firm that, regardless of age and sex, a decrease in energy 
intake through diet or an increase in energy expenditure 
through exercise is associated with a substantial reduc-
tion in waist circumference
78–87. For studies wherein the 
negative energy balance is induced by diet alone, evi-
dence from RCTs suggest that waist circumference is 
C- statistic
A measure of goodness- of-fit 
for binary outcomes in a 
logistic regression model.
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 183
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement

reduced independent of diet composition and duration 
of treatment88. Whether a dose–response relationship 
exists between a negative energy balance induced by diet 
and waist circumference is unclear.
Although it is intuitive to suggest that increased 
amounts of exercise would be positively associated 
with corresponding reductions in waist circumference, 
to date this notion is not supported by evidence from 
RCTs71,74,89–91. For example, Robert Ross and colleagues 
conducted a large RCT whereby participants (n = 300) 
were assigned to either a control arm or an intervention 
arm with different exercise levels: low, defined as 180 kcal 
per session for women and 300 kcal per session for men;  
and high, defined as 360 kcal per session for women and 
600 kcal per session for men
74. A doubling of the energy 
expenditure induced by exercise did not result in a dif-
ference in waist circumference reduction between the 
exercise groups. However, all intervention groups sig-
nificantly reduced waist circumference (~5 cm) com-
pared with the control arm (P < 0.001)
74. These findings  
are consistent with the findings of Christopher Slentz 
and colleagues, who reported no difference in waist 
circumference or V AT reduction between low-level 
(14 kcal/kg body weight per week, n  = 46) and high-  
level (23 kcal/kg body weight per week, n = 42) exercise 
groups
90,91. In addition, Timothy Church and colleagues 
conducted an RCT whereby participants were prescribed 
different levels of exercise (low, 4 kcal/kg body weight 
per week, n = 155; moderate, 8 kcal/kg body weight per  
week, n = 104; or high, 12 kcal/kg body weight per week,  
n = 103) that was matched for intensity (50% peak 
oxy gen consumption (VO2peak))71. A significant reduc-
tion was observed in waist circumference across all exer-
cise groups compared with the no- exercise controls, with 
no difference between the different prescribed levels71.
Few RCTs have examined the effects of exercise 
intensity on waist circumference74,90–92. A small trial con-
ducted by Brian Irving and colleagues observed that a 
high- intensity exercise (over the lactate threshold 3 days 
per week and under the lactate threshold 2 days per week) 
group (n = 9) had significantly reduced waist circum-
ference compared with a low- intensity (under the lactate 
threshold 5 days per week) group (n = 11)
92. However, no 
significant differences were observed in V AT reduction by 
single slice CT between high- intensity and low- intensity 
groups. A large RCT conducted by Slentz and colleagues  
observed that an increase in exercise intensity from mod-
erate (40–55% VO
2peak, n = 40) to vigorous (65–80% 
VO2peak, n = 42) intensity was not associated with dif-
ferences in waist circumference reduction90,91. However,  
the researchers did not fix the level of exercise between the  
intensity groups, which might explain their observations. 
Ross and colleagues controlled the amount of energy 
expenditure between moderate- intensity (50% VO
2peak, 
n = 76) and high- intensity (75% VO2peak, n = 76) exercise 
groups74. Their observations are consistent with those of 
Slentz and colleagues, whereby differences in exercise 
intensity did not affect waist circumference reductions. 
These findings are consistent with a meta- analysis car-
ried out in 2017 wherein no difference in waist circum-
ference reduction was observed between high- intensity 
interval training and moderate- intensity exercise
93. In 
summary, current evidence suggests that increasing the 
intensity of exercise interventions is not associated with 
a further decrease in waist circumference.
V AT mass is not routinely measured in clinical 
settings, so it is of interest whether reductions in waist 
circumference are associated with corresponding reduc-
tions in V AT. Although evidence from systematic reviews 
and meta- analyses demonstrate an association between 
reductions in waist circumference and V AT
79,82,84,85,94, the 
shared variance is modest (~40%)75,95,96. Of note, to our 
knowledge every study that has reported a reduction in 
waist circumference has also reported a corresponding 
reduction in V AT. Thus, although it is reasonable to sug-
gest that a reduction in waist circumference is associated 
with a reduction in V AT mass, a precise estimation of 
individual V AT reduction from waist circumference is 
not possible. Nonetheless, the corresponding reduction 
of V AT with waist circumference in a dose- dependent 
manner highlights the importance of routine meas-
urement of waist circumference in clinical practice. 
Of particular interest to practitioners, several reviews 
have observed significant V AT reduction in response to 
exercise in the absence of weight loss
80,85.
Conclusions and recommendations — changes in waist 
circumference in response to treatment. 
•	 Exercise and/or diet consistent with guideline recom-
mendations are associated with substantial reduc-
tions in waist circumference, independent of age, sex 
or ethnicity.
/uni2191 Physical activity
/uni2191 Healthy eating
Target Beneﬁt Beneﬁt Objective
/uni2193 Waist circumference /uni2193 Common 
    cardiometabolic 
    risk factors
/uni2193 Morbidity and 
    mortality risk 
Fig. 3 | Waist circumference is a modifiable risk factor that can indicate cardiometabolic risk , morbidity and 
mortality. An illustration of the important role that decreases in waist circumference have for linking improvements in 
lifestyle behaviours with downstream reductions in the risk of morbidity and mortality. The benefits associated with 
reductions in waist circumference might be observed with or without a change in BMI.
VO2peak
The highest value of VO2  
(that is, oxygen consumption) 
attained during an incremental 
or other high- intensity  
exercise test.
Lactate threshold
The exercise intensity at which 
the blood concentration of 
lactate and/or lactic acid begins 
to exponentially increase.
184 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement

•	 Available evidence from RCTs suggests that exercise 
is associated with substantial reductions in waist cir-
cumference, independent of the quantity or intensity 
of exercise.
•	 Exercise- induced or diet- induced reductions in 
waist circumference are observed with or without 
weight loss.
•	 We recommend that practitioners routinely measure 
waist circumference as it provides them with a sim-
ple anthropometric measure to determine the effi-
cacy of lifestyle- based strategies designed to reduce 
abdominal obesity.
Measurement of waist circumference
The emergence of waist circumference as a strong inde-
pendent marker of morbidity and mortality is striking 
given that there is no consensus regarding the optimal 
protocol for measurement of waist circumference. 
Moreover, the waist circumference protocols recom-
mended by leading health authorities have no scien-
tific rationale. In 2008, a panel of experts performed a 
systematic review of 120 studies to determine whether 
measurement protocol influenced the relationship 
between waist circumference, morbidity and mortality, 
and observed similar patterns of association between 
the outcomes and all waist circumference protocols 
across sample size, sex, age and ethnicity
97. Upon care-
ful review of the various protocols described within the 
literature, the panel recommended that the waist cir -
cumference protocol described by the WHO guidelines98 
(the midpoint between the lower border of the rib cage 
and the 
iliac crest) and the NIH guidelines99 (the supe-
rior border of the iliac crest) are probably more reli-
able and feasible measures for both the practitioner and 
the general public. This conclusion was made as both 
waist circumference measurement protocols use bony 
landmarks to identify the proper waist circumference 
measurement location.
The expert panel recognized that differences might 
exist in absolute waist circumference measures due 
to the difference in protocols between the WHO and 
NIH methods. However, few studies have compared 
measures at the sites recommended by the WHO and 
NIH. Jack Wang and colleagues reported no difference 
between the iliac crest and midpoint protocols for men 
and an absolute difference of 1.8  cm for women
100. 
These observations were confirmed by Caitlin Mason 
and Peter Katzmarzyk, who reported no difference 
between the iliac crest (NIH) and midpoint (WHO) pro-
tocols for men and an absolute difference of ~2 cm for 
women
101. More importantly, Mason and Katzmarzyk 
reported that the prevalence estimates of abdominal 
obesity (here defined as waist circumference >88 cm 
for women and >102 cm for men) identified using the 
iliac crest and midpoint protocols were about 32% for 
both protocols in men and 47% and 41% for the iliac 
crest and midpoint protocols, respectively, in women101. 
Consequently, although adopting a standard approach 
to waist circumference measurement would add to the 
utility of waist circumference measures for obesity-  
related risk stratification, the prevalence estimates of 
abdominal obesity in predominantly white populations 
using the iliac crest or midpoint protocols do not seem 
to be materially different.
Of note, the observation that the NIH and WHO 
protocols do not substantially differ is not consistent 
with those made by Yumi Matsushita and colleagues, 
who sampled 940 Japanese adults and reported that the 
mean difference between the iliac crest and midpoint 
protocols for men was ~2 cm, whereas for women the 
difference was ~9 cm 
(reFs 102,103). However, the waist cir-
cumference measurements assessed at the two sites had 
a similar ability to screen for the metabolic syndrome, 
as defined by National Cholesterol Education Program, 
in a cohort of 1,140 Japanese adults
102.
Several investigations have evaluated the relationship 
between self- measured and technician- measured waist 
circumference104–108. Instructions for self- measurement 
of waist circumference are often provided in point form 
through simple surveys 108. Good agreement between 
self- measured and technician- measured waist circum-
ference is observed, with strong correlation coefficients 
ranging between 0.8 and 0.9 for both men and women. 
However, both men and women tend to underestimate 
their waist circumference measures compared with the 
technician- measured values, with differences ranging 
between about 1 cm and 3 cm. Moreover, high BMI and 
large baseline waist circumference are associated with 
a larger degree of under- reporting
105,107. Overall these 
observations are encouraging and suggest that self-  
measures of waist circumference can be obtained in a 
straightforward manner and are in good agreement with 
technician- measured values.
Instructional videos that provide a detailed illustra-
tion of the step-by-step procedures for both technician- 
measurement and self-measurement of waist circum -
ference can be freely accessed at myhealthywaist (http://
www.myhealthywaist.org/evaluating-cmr/clinical- 
tools/waist-circumference-measurement-guidelines/
index.html).
Conclusions and recommendations — measurement of 
waist circumference. 
•	 Currently, no consensus exists on the optimal proto-
col for measurement of waist circumference and little 
scientific rationale is provided for any of the waist 
circumference protocols recommended by leading 
health authorities.
•	 The waist circumference measurement protocol has no 
substantial influence on the association between waist 
circumference, all- cause mortality and CVD- related 
mortality, CVD and T2DM.
•	 Absolute differences in waist circumference obtained 
by the two most often used protocols, iliac crest 
(NIH) and midpoint between the last rib and iliac 
crest (WHO), are generally small for adult men but 
are much larger for women.
•	 The classification of abdominal obesity might differ 
depending on the waist circumference protocol.
•	 We recommend that waist circumference measure-
ments are obtained at the level of the iliac crest or the 
midpoint between the last rib and iliac crest. The pro-
tocol selected to measure waist circumference should 
be used consistently.
Iliac crest
The superior border of the 
wing of the ilium.
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 185
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement

•	 Self- measures of waist circumference can be obtained 
in a straightforward manner and are in good agreement 
with technician- measured values.
Threshold values to estimate risk
Current guidelines for identifying obesity indicate that 
adverse health risk increases when moving from nor -
mal weight to obese BMI categories. Moreover, within 
each BMI category, individuals with high waist circum-
ference values are at increased risk of adverse health 
outcomes compared with those with normal waist 
circumference values
109. For example, a single waist cir-
cumference threshold for white adults (men >102 cm; 
women >88 cm) is currently used to denote a high waist 
circumference, regardless of BMI category. Of note, these 
sex- specific thresholds were originally developed using 
cross- sectional data in white adults, among whom a waist 
circumference of 102 cm in men and 88  cm in women 
corresponded to a BMI of 30.0 kg/m2, which is the BMI 
threshold for obesity109. Thus, these waist circumference 
threshold values were designed to be used in place of 
BMI as an alternative way to identify obesity and con-
sequently were not developed based on the relationship 
between waist circumference and adverse health risk.
In order to address this limitation, Christopher Ardern  
and colleagues developed and cross- validated waist cir-
cumference thresholds within BMI categories in rela-
tion to estimated risk of future CVD (using FRS)
110. 
The utility of the derived values was compared with the 
single waist circumference thresholds (women >88 cm;  
men >102  cm) recommended by leading health 
authorities. The results of their study revealed that the 
current recommendations that use a single waist cir -
cumference threshold across all BMI categories are 
insufficient to identify those at increased health risk. 
In both sexes, the use of BMI category- specific waist 
circumference thresholds improved the identification 
of individuals at a high risk of future coronary events, 
leading the authors to propose BMI- specific waist cir-
cumference values 
(TAble  1). In 2009, Harpreet Bajaj 
and colleagues compared the prognostic performance 
of the Ardern waist circumference values (TAble  1) with 
the traditional waist circumference values (men >102 cm; 
women >88 cm) for all-cause mortality in a large cohort 
of 5,453 predominantly white adults with high cardiomet-
abolic risk111. For both men and women, the Ardern waist 
circumference values substantially improved predictions 
of mortality compared with the traditional values. These 
observ ations are promising and support, at least for white 
adults, the clinical utility of the BMI category- specific 
waist circumference thresholds given in TAble  1.
Of note, BMI- specific waist circumference thresh-
olds have been developed in African American and 
white men and women
112. Similar to previous research, 
the optimal waist circumference thresholds increased 
across BMI categories in both ethnic groups and were 
higher in men than in women. However, no evidence 
of differences in waist circumference occurred between 
ethnicities within each sex
112.
Pischon and colleagues investigated the associa-
tions between BMI, waist circumference and risk of 
death among 359,387 adults from nine countries in the 
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and 
Nutrition cohort
10. In this study, the authors confirmed 
that, for a given BMI in men and women, the risk of 
death increased by 17% in men and 13% in women for 
every 5 cm increase in waist circumference. Although 
the waist circumference values that optimized predic-
tion of the risk of death for any given BMI value were 
not reported, the findings reinforce the notion that waist 
circumference thresholds increase across BMI catego -
ries and that the combination of waist circumference and 
BMI provide improved predictions of health risk than 
either anthropometric measure alone.
Table 1 | Waist circumference thresholds
BMI category (kg/m2) Waist circumference (cm)a
Women Men
Normal weight (18.5–24.9) ≥ 80 ≥ 90
Overweight (25–29.9) ≥ 90 ≥ 100
Obese I (30–34.9 ) ≥ 105 ≥ 110
Obese II and III (≥35 ) ≥ 115 ≥ 125
Table provides waist circumference thresholds stratified by 
BMI for white individuals; individuals with measurements 
higher than these values have a high risk of future coronary 
events (based on 10-year risk of coronary events or the 
presence of diabetes mellitus). 
aWaist circumference 
threshold indicating increased health risk within each BMI 
category. Data were originally presented in reF .110.
Table 2 | Ethnicity- specific thresholds
Ethnic group Waist circumference 
(cm)a
Ref.
Japaneseb
Men ≥ 85 122
Women ≥ 90 122
Jordanian
Men ≥ 98 123
Women ≥ 96 123
Chinese
Men ≥ 80 124
Women ≥ 80 124
Korean
Men ≥ 90
125
Women ≥ 85 125
Tunisian
Men ≥ 85
126
Women ≥ 85 126
Iranian
Men ≥ 89
127
Women ≥ 91 127
Asian Indian
Men ≥ 90
128
Women ≥ 80 128
aWaist circumference values for adults above which cardio-
metabolic risk is elevated. bJapanese waist circumference 
values are thresholds above which visceral adipose tissue 
volume is >100 cm3.
186 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement

Ethnicity- specific values for waist circumference 
that have been optimized for the identification of 
adults with elevated CVD risk have been developed 
(TAble  2). With few exceptions, the values presented  
in TAble  2 were derived using cross- sectional data and 
were not considered in association with BMI. The 
range in high- risk waist circumference values for both 
adult men (80–98 cm) and women (80–96 cm) varies 
considerably across ethnicities, which confirms the 
need for ethnicity- specific waist circumference values. 
Prospective studies using representative populations are 
required to firmly establish ethnicity- specific and BMI 
category- specific waist circumference threshold values 
that distinguish adults at increased health risk.
As noted above, the ethnicity- specific waist circum-
ference values in 
TAble  2 were optimized for the identi-
fication of adults with elevated CVD risk. The Japanese 
waist circumference values, however, were optimized for 
identification of men and women with CT- measured 
V AT values >100 cm3 at the level of the umbilicus 
(navel)112. The rationale for using V AT as the outcome 
was that cardiometabolic risk was found to increase 
substantially at this V AT level for adult Japanese men 
and women56. Accordingly, Japanese threshold values for 
waist circumference were established at 85 cm in men 
and 90 cm in women, which corresponded to the V AT 
threshold of 100 cm3 (reF .112).
Conclusions and recommendations — values of waist 
circumference to estimate health risk. 
•	 From the evidence available, we question the ration-
ale behind current guidelines recommending that a 
single waist circumference threshold for white adults 
(men >102 cm; women >88 cm) be used to denote a 
high waist circumference, regardless of BMI category.
•	 We recommend that prospective studies using repre-
sentative populations are carried out to address the 
need for BMI category- specific waist circumference 
thresholds across different ethnicities (such as those 
proposed in 
TAble  1 for white adults). This recom-
mendation does not, however, diminish the impor-
tance of measuring waist circumference to follow 
changes over time and, hence, the utility of strategies 
designed to reduce abdominal obesity and associated 
health risk.
Conclusions
The main recommendation of this Consensus Statement 
is that waist circumference should be routinely measured 
in clinical practice, as it can provide additional informa-
tion for guiding patient management. Indeed, decades 
of research have produced unequivocal evidence that 
waist circumference provides both independent and 
additive information to BMI for morbidity and mortal-
ity prediction. On the basis of these observations, not 
including waist circumference measurement in routine 
clinical practice fails to provide an optimal approach for 
stratifying patients according to risk. The measurement 
of waist circumference in clinical settings is both impor-
tant and feasible. Self- measurement of waist circum-
ference is easily obtained and in good agreement with 
technician- measured waist circumference. Numerous 
epidemiological studies and RCTs have now demon-
strated that reductions in waist circumference can be 
achieved by routine, moderate- intensity exercise and/or  
diet changes.
Gaps in our knowledge still remain, and refinement 
of waist circumference threshold values for a given BMI 
category across different ages, by sex and by ethnicity 
will require further investigation. To address this need, 
we recommend that prospective studies be carried out 
in the relevant populations. Despite these gaps in our 
knowledge, overwhelming evidence presented here 
suggests that the measurement of waist circumference 
improves patient management and that its omission from 
routine clinical practice for the majority of patients is 
no longer acceptable. Accordingly, the inclusion of waist 
circumference measurement in routine practice affords 
practitioners with an important opportunity to improve 
the care and health of patients. Health professionals 
should be trained to properly perform this simple meas-
urement and should consider it as an important vital 
sign to assess and identify, as an important treatment  
target in clinical practice.
Published online 4 February 2020
1. Ng, M. et al. Global, regional, and national prevalence 
of overweight and obesity in children and adults 
during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 384, 
766–781 (2014).
2. Afshin, A., Forouzanfar, M. H., Reitsma, M. B. &  
Sur, P . Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 
countries over 25 years. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 13–27 
(2017).
3. Phillips, C. M. Metabolically healthy obesity across 
the life course: epidemiology, determinants, and 
implications. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1391, 85–100 
(2017).
4. Bell, J. A. et al. The natural course of healthy obesity 
over 20 years. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 65, 101–102 
(2015).
5. Eckel, N., Meidtner, K., Kalle- Uhlmann, T ., Stefan, N. 
& Schulze, M. B. Metabolically healthy obesity and 
cardiovascular events: a systematic review and  
meta- analysis. Eur. J. Prev. Cardiol. 23, 956–966 
(2016).
6. Brauer, P . et al. Recommendations for prevention of 
weight gain and use of behavioural and pharmacologic 
interventions to manage overweight and obesity  
in adults in primary care. CMAJ 187, 184–195 
(2015).
7. Garvey, W. T . et al. American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology 
comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for medical 
care of patients with obesity. Endocr. Pract. 22  
(Suppl. 3), 1–203 (2016).
8. Jensen, M. D. et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline  
for the management of overweight and obesity in 
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association task force on practice 
guidelines and the Obesity society. Circulation 129, 
S102–S138 (2014).
9. T sigos, C. et al. Management of obesity in adults: 
European clinical practice guidelines. Obes. Facts 1, 
106–116 (2008).
10. Pischon, T ., Boeing, H., Hoffmann, K. & Bergmann, M. 
General and abdominal adiposity and risk of death  
in Europe. N. Engl. J. Med. 359, 2105–2120  
(2008).
11. Cerhan, J. R. et al. A pooled analysis of waist 
circumference and mortality in 650,000 adults. 
Mayo Clin. Proc. 89, 335–345 (2014).
12. Zhang, C., Rexrode, K. M., van Dam, R. M., Li, T . Y. & 
Hu, F. B. Abdominal obesity and the risk of all- cause, 
cardiovascular, and cancer mortality: sixteen years of 
follow- up in US women. Circulation 117, 1658–1667 
(2008).
13. Song, X. et al. Comparison of various surrogate 
obesity indicators as predictors of cardiovascular 
mortality in four European populations. Eur. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 67, 1298–1302 (2013).
14. Seidell, J. C. Waist circumference and waist/hip ratio in 
relation to all- cause mortality, cancer and sleep apnea. 
Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 64, 35–41 (2010).
15. Snijder, M. B. et al. Associations of hip and thigh 
circumferences independent of waist circumference 
with the incidence of type 2 diabetes: the Hoorn 
study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 77, 1192–1197 (2003).
16. Jacobs, E. J. et al. Waist circumference and all- cause 
mortality in a large US cohort. Arch. Intern. Med. 
170, 1293–1301 (2010).
17. Vague, J. The degree of masculine differentiation  
of obesities: a factor determining predisposition to 
diabetes, atherosclerosis, gout, and uric calculous 
disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 4, 20–34 (1956).
18. Kissebah, A. H. et al. Relation of body fat distribution 
to metabolic complications of obesity. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 54, 254–260 (1982).
19. Krotkiewski, M., Bjorntorp, P ., Sjostrom, L. &  
Smith, U. Impact of obesity on metabolism in men  
and women: importance of regional adipose tissue 
distribution. J. Clin. Invest. 72, 1150–1162  
(1983).
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 187
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement

20. Hartz, A. J., Rupley, D. C. Jr., Kalkhoff, R. D. &  
Rimm, A. A. Relationship of obesity to diabetes: 
influence of obesity level and body fat distribution. 
Prev. Med. 12, 351–357 (1983).
21. Larsson, B. et al. Abdominal adipose tissue distribution, 
obesity, and risk of cardiovascular disease and death: 
13 year follow up of participants in the study of  
men born in 1913. Br. Med. J. (Clin. Res. Ed.) 288, 
1401–1404 (1984).
22. Ohlson, L. O. et al. The influence of body fat 
distribution on the incidence of diabetes mellitus: 
13.5 years of follow- up of the participants in the study 
of men born in 1913. Diabetes 34, 1055–1058 
(1985).
23. Snijder, M. B., van Dam, R. M., Visser, M. &  
Seidell, J. C. What aspects of body fat are particularly 
hazardous and how do we measure them? Int. J. 
Epidemiol. 35, 83–92 (2006).
24. Neeland, I. J. et al. Visceral and ectopic fat, 
atherosclerosis, and cardiometabolic disease:  
a position statement. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 7, 
715–725 (2019).
25. Lean, M. E., Han, T . S. & Morrison, C. E. Waist 
circumference as a measure for indicating need for 
weight management. BMJ 311, 158–161 (1995).
26. Hsieh, S. D. & Yoshinaga, H. Waist/height ratio as a 
simple and useful predictor of coronary heart disease 
risk factors in women. Intern. Med. 34, 1147–1152 
(1995).
27. Ashwell, M., Lejeune, S. & McPherson, K. Ratio of 
waist circumference to height may be better indicator 
of need for weight management. BMJ 312, 377 
(1996).
28. Browning, L. M., Hsieh, S. D. & Ashwell, M. A 
systematic review of waist- to-height ratio as a 
screening tool for the prediction of cardiovascular 
disease and diabetes: 0.5 could be a suitable global 
boundary value. Nutr. Res. Rev. 23, 247–269 (2010).
29. Ashwell, M., Gunn, P . & Gibson, S. Waist- to-height ratio 
is a better screening tool than waist circumference and 
BMI for adult cardiometabolic risk factors: systematic 
review and meta- analysis. Obes. Rev. 13, 275–286 
(2012).
30. Paajanen, T . A., Oksala, N. K., Kuukasjarvi, P . & 
Karhunen, P . J. Short stature is associated with 
coronary heart disease: a systematic review of the 
literature and a meta- analysis. Eur. Heart J. 31, 
1802–1809 (2010).
31. Han, T . S. et al. The influences of height and age  
on waist circumference as an index of adiposity in 
adults. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 21, 83–89 
(1997).
32. Valdez, R., Seidell, J. C., Ahn, Y. I. & Weiss, K. M. A 
new index of abdominal adiposity as an indicator of 
risk for cardiovascular disease. A cross- population 
study. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 17, 77–82 
(1993).
33. Amankwah, N. et al. Abdominal obesity index as an 
alternative central obesity measurement during a 
physical examination. Open. Nutr. J. 12, 21–29 
(2018).
34. Walls, H. L. et al. T rends in BMI of urban Australian 
adults, 1980–2000. Public. Health Nutr. 13,  
631–638 (2010).
35. Janssen, I., Shields, M., Craig, C. L. & T remblay, M. S. 
Changes in the obesity phenotype within Canadian 
children and adults, 1981 to 2007–2009. Obesity 
20, 916–919 (2012).
36. Albrecht, S. S., Gordon- Larsen, P ., Stern, D. &  
Popkin, B. M. Is waist circumference per body mass 
index rising differentially across the United States, 
England, China and Mexico? Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 69, 
1306–1312 (2015).
37. Visscher, T . L., Heitmann, B. L., Rissanen, A.,  
Lahti- Koski, M. & Lissner, L. A break in the obesity 
epidemic? Explained by biases or misinterpretation  
of the data? Int. J. Obes. 39, 189–198 (2015).
38. Rexrode, K. M. et al. Abdominal adiposity and 
coronary heart disease in women. JAMA 280,  
1843–1848 (1998).
39. Despres, J. P . Excess visceral adipose tissue/ectopic fat 
the missing link in the obesity paradox? J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol. 57, 1887–1889 (2011).
40. Zhang, X. et al. Abdominal adiposity and mortality in 
Chinese women. Arch. Intern. Med. 167, 886–892 
(2007).
41. de Hollander, E. L. et al. The association between 
waist circumference and risk of mortality considering 
body mass index in 65- to 74-year- olds: a meta- 
analysis of 29 cohorts involving more than 58,000 
elderly persons. Int. J. Epidemiol. 41, 805–817 
(2012).
42. World Health Organisation. Obesity: preventing and 
managing the global epidemic: report of a WHO 
consultation (World Health Organisation T echnical 
Report Series 894) (WHO, 2000).
43. Bigaard, J. et al. Waist circumference, BMI, smoking, 
and mortality in middle- aged men and women.  
Obes. Res. 11, 895–903 (2003).
44. Coutinho, T . et al. Central obesity and survival in 
subjects with coronary artery disease: a systematic 
review of the literature and collaborative analysis  
with individual subject data. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 57, 
1877–1886 (2011).
45. Sluik, D. et al. Associations between general and 
abdominal adiposity and mortality in individuals with 
diabetes mellitus. Am. J. Epidemiol. 174, 22–34 
(2011).
46. Despres, J. P . & Lemieux, I. Abdominal obesity and 
metabolic syndrome. Nature 444, 881–887 (2006).
47. Snijder, M. B. et al. Low subcutaneous thigh fat is a 
risk factor for unfavourable glucose and lipid levels, 
independently of high abdominal fat. The health ABC 
study. Diabetologia 48, 301–308 (2005).
48. Eastwood, S. V. et al. Thigh fat and muscle each 
contribute to excess cardiometabolic risk in South 
Asians, independent of visceral adipose tissue. 
Obesity 22, 2071–2079 (2014).
49. Lewis, G. F., Carpentier, A., Adeli, K. & Giacca, A. 
Disordered fat storage and mobilization in the 
pathogenesis of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. 
Endocr. Rev. 23, 201–229 (2002).
50. Despres, J. P . et al. The insulin resistance- dyslipidemic 
syndrome: contribution of visceral obesity and 
therapeutic implications. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. 
Disord. 19 (Suppl. 1), S76–S86 (1995).
51. Nguyen- Duy, T . B., Nichaman, M. Z., Church, T . S., 
Blair, S. N. & Ross, R. Visceral fat and liver fat are 
independent predictors of metabolic risk factors  
in men. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 284, 
E1065–E1071 (2003).
52. Kuk, J. L. et al. Visceral fat is an independent predictor 
of all- cause mortality in men. Obesity 14, 336–341 
(2006).
53. Kuk, J. L., Janiszewski, P . M. & Ross, R. Body mass 
index and hip and thigh circumferences are negatively 
associated with visceral adipose tissue after control  
for waist circumference. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 85,  
1540–1544 (2007).
54. Janssen, I., Katzmarzyk, P . T . & Ross, R. Body mass 
index is inversely related to mortality in older people 
after adjustment for waist circumference. J. Am. Geriatr. 
Soc. 53, 2112–2118 (2005).
55. Alberti, K. G., Zimmet, P . & Shaw, J. The metabolic 
syndrome: a new worldwide definition. Lancet 366, 
1059–1062 (2005).
56. Zimmet, P ., Magliano, D., Matsuzawa, Y., Alberti, G.  
& Shaw, J. The metabolic syndrome: a global public 
health problem and a new definition. J. Atheroscler. 
Thromb. 12, 295–300 (2005).
57. Hlatky, M. A. et al. Criteria for evaluation of novel 
markers of cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 119, 
2408–2416 (2009).
58. Greenland, P . et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for 
assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic 
adults: executive summary: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart 
Association task force on practice guidelines. 
Circulation 122, 2748–2764 (2010).
59. Pencina, M. J., D Agostino, R. B., Pencina, K. M., 
Janssens, A. C. & Greenland, P . Interpreting 
incremental value of markers added to risk prediction 
models. Am. J. Epidemiol. 176, 473–481 (2012).
60. Carmienke, S. et al. General and abdominal obesity 
parameters and their combination in relation to 
mortality: a systematic review and meta- regression 
analysis. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 67, 573–585 (2013).
61. Hong, Y. et al. Metabolic syndrome, its preeminent 
clusters, incident coronary heart disease and all- cause 
mortality: results of prospective analysis for the 
atherosclerosis risk in communities study. J. Intern. 
Med. 262, 113–122 (2007).
62. Wilson, P . W. et al. Prediction of coronary heart 
disease using risk factor categories. Circulation 97, 
1837–1847 (1998).
63
. Goff, D. C. Jr., Lloyd- Jones, D. M., Bennett, G. & 
Coady, S. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment 
of cardiovascular risk: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
task force on practice guidelines. Circulation 129, 
S49–S73 (2014).
64. Khera, R. et al. Accuracy of the pooled cohort equation 
to estimate atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk 
events by obesity class: a pooled assessment of  
five longitudinal cohort studies. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0735-1097(18)32279-4 
(2018).
65. Empana, J. P . et al. Predicting CHD risk in France:  
a pooled analysis of the D.E.S.I.R., three city, PRIME, 
and SU.VI.MAX studies. Eur. J. Cardiovasc. Prev. 
Rehabil. 18, 175–185 (2011).
66. Cook, N. R. Methods for evaluating novel biomarkers: 
a new paradigm. Int. J. Clin. Pract. 64, 1723–1727 
(2010).
67. Cook, N. R. Use and misuse of the receiver operating 
characteristic curve in risk prediction. Circulation 115, 
928–935 (2007).
68. Pencina, M. J., D. Agostino, R. B., Sr. D. Agostino, R. B. Jr.  
& Vasan, R. S. Evaluating the added predictive ability 
of a new marker: from area under the ROC curve to 
reclassification and beyond. Stat. Med. 27, 157–172 
(2008).
69. Pencina, M. J. et al. Quantifying importance of major 
risk factors for coronary heart disease. Circulation 
139, 1603–1611 (2018).
70. Lincoff, A. M. et al. Evacetrapib and cardiovascular 
outcomes in high- risk vascular disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 
376, 1933–1942 (2017).
71. Church, T . S., Earnest, C. P ., Skinner, J. S. &  
Blair, S. N. Effects of different doses of physical 
activity on cardiorespiratory fitness among sedentary, 
overweight or obese postmenopausal women with 
elevated blood pressure: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA 297, 2081–2091 (2007).
72. O'Donovan, G. et al. Changes in cardiorespiratory 
fitness and coronary heart disease risk factors 
following 24 wk of moderate- or high- intensity 
exercise of equal energy cost. J. Appl. Physiol. 98, 
1619–1625 (2005).
73. Ross, R. et al. Reduction in obesity and related 
comorbid conditions after diet- induced weight loss or 
exercise- induced weight loss in men: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann. Intern. Med. 133, 92–103 
(2000).
74. Ross, R., Hudson, R., Stotz, P . J. & Lam, M. Effects of 
exercise amount and intensity on abdominal obesity 
and glucose tolerance in obese adults: a randomized 
trial. Ann. Intern. Med. 162, 325–334 (2015).
75. Ross, R. et al. Exercise- induced reduction in obesity 
and insulin resistance in women: a randomized 
controlled trial. Obes. Res. 12, 789–798 (2004).
76. Short, K. R. et al. Impact of aerobic exercise training 
on age- related changes in insulin sensitivity and 
muscle oxidative capacity. Diabetes 52, 1888–1896 
(2003).
77. Weiss, E. P . et al. Improvements in glucose tolerance 
and insulin action induced by increasing energy 
expenditure or decreasing energy intake: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 84, 1033–1042 
(2006).
78. Chaston, T . B. & Dixon, J. B. Factors associated with 
percent change in visceral versus subcutaneous 
abdominal fat during weight loss: findings from  
a systematic review. Int. J. Obes. 32, 619–628 
(2008).
79. Hammond, B. P ., Brennan, A. M. & Ross, R. in Body 
Composition: Health and Performance in Exercise and 
Sport (ed. Lukaski, H. C.) 109–128 (CRC Press, T aylor 
and Francis Group, 2017).
80. Kay, S. J. & Fiatarone Singh, M. A. The influence  
of physical activity on abdominal fat: a systematic 
review of the literature. Obes. Rev. 7, 183–200 
(2006).
81. Merlotti, C., Ceriani, V., Morabito, A. & Pontiroli, A. E. 
Subcutaneous fat loss is greater than visceral fat loss 
with diet and exercise, weight- loss promoting drugs and 
bariatric surgery: a critical review and meta- analysis. 
Int. J. Obes. 41, 672–682 (2017).
82. Ohkawara, K., T anaka, S., Miyachi, M.,  
Ishikawa- T akata, K. & T abata, I. A dose- response 
relation between aerobic exercise and visceral fat 
reduction: systematic review of clinical trials. Int. J. 
Obes. 31, 1786–1797 (2007).
83. O'Neill, T ., Shalev- Goldman, E. & Ross, R. in  
Exercise Therapy in Adult Individuals with Obesity 
(ed. Hansen, D.) 43-72 (Nova Science Publishers, 
2013).
84. Sabag, A. et al. Exercise and ectopic fat in type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Diabetes Metab. 43, 195–210 (2017).
85. Verheggen, R. J. et al. A systematic review and meta- 
analysis on the effects of exercise training versus 
hypocaloric diet: distinct effects on body weight and 
visceral adipose tissue. Obes. Rev. 17, 664–690 
(2016).
188 | march 2020 | volume 16 
www.nature.com/nrendo
ConSenSuS Statement
86. Santos, F. L., Esteves, S. S., da Costa Pereira, A., 
Yancy, W. S. Jr. & Nunes, J. P . Systematic review and 
meta- analysis of clinical trials of the effects of low 
carbohydrate diets on cardiovascular risk factors. 
Obes. Rev. 13, 1048–1066 (2012).
87. Gepner, Y. et al. Effect of distinct lifestyle interventions 
on mobilization of fat storage pools: CENTRAL 
magnetic resonance imaging randomized controlled 
trial. Circulation 137, 1143–1157 (2018).
88. Sacks, F. M. et al. Comparison of weight- loss diets 
with different compositions of fat, protein, and 
carbohydrates. N. Engl. J. Med. 360, 859–873 
(2009).
89. Keating, S. E. et al. Effect of aerobic exercise training 
dose on liver fat and visceral adiposity. J. Hepatol. 63, 
174–182 (2015).
90. Slentz, C. A. et al. Effects of the amount of exercise  
on body weight, body composition, and measures of 
central obesity. STRRIDE: a randomized controlled 
study. Arch. Intern. Med. 164, 31–39 (2004).
91. Slentz, C. A. et al. Inactivity, exercise, and visceral  
fat. STRRIDE: a randomized, controlled study of 
exercise intensity and amount. J. Appl. Physiol. 99, 
1613–1618 (2005).
92. Irving, B. A. et al. Effect of exercise training intensity 
on abdominal visceral fat and body composition.  
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 40, 1863–1872 (2008).
93. Wewege, M., van den Berg, R., Ward, R. E. & Keech, A. 
The effects of high- intensity interval training vs. 
moderate- intensity continuous training on body 
composition in overweight and obese adults: a 
systematic review and meta- analysis. Obes. Rev. 18, 
635–646 (2017).
94. Vissers, D. et al. The effect of exercise on visceral 
adipose tissue in overweight adults: a systematic 
review and meta- analysis. PLoS One 8, e56415 
(2013).
95. Janiszewski, P . M. & Ross, R. Physical activity in  
the treatment of obesity: beyond body weight 
reduction. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 32, 512–522 
(2007).
96. Kuk, J. L., Lee, S., Heymsfield, S. B. & Ross, R.  
Waist circumference and abdominal adipose tissue 
distribution: influence of age and sex. Am. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 81, 1330–1334 (2005).
97. Ross, R. et al. Does the relationship between waist 
circumference, morbidity and mortality depend on 
measurement protocol for waist circumference?  
Obes. Rev. 9, 312–325 (2008).
98. World Health Organisation. Physical status: the use 
and interpretation of anthropometry: report of a WHO 
Expert Committee (WHO, 1995).
99. NHLBI Obesity Education Initiative. The practical 
guide to the identification, evaluation and treatment 
of overweight and obesity in adults (NIH, 2000).
100. Wang, J. et al. Comparisons of waist circumferences 
measured at 4 sites. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 77, 379–384 
(2003).
101. Mason, C. & Katzmarzyk, P . T . Variability in waist 
circumference measurements according to anatomic 
measurement site. Obesity 17, 1789–1795 (2009).
102. Matsushita, Y., T omita, K., Yokoyama, T . & Mizoue, T . 
Optimal waist circumference measurement site for 
assessing the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Care 32, 
e70 (2009).
103. Matsushita, Y., T omita, K., Yokoyama, T . & Mizoue, T . 
Relations between waist circumference at four sites 
and metabolic risk factors. Obesity 18, 2374–2378 
(2010).
104. Pendergast, K. et al. Impact of waist circumference 
difference on health- care cost among overweight and 
obese subjects: the PROCEED cohort. Value Health 
13, 402–410 (2010).
105. Spencer, E. A., Roddam, A. W. & Key, T . J. Accuracy  
of self- reported waist and hip measurements in 4492 
EPIC- Oxford participants. Public Health Nutr. 7,  
723–727 (2004).
106. Roberts, C. A., Wilder, L. B., Jackson, R. T ., Moy, T . F.  
& Becker, D. M. Accuracy of self- measurement of waist 
and hip circumference in men and women. J. Am. Diet. 
Assoc. 97, 534–536 (1997).
107. Bigaard, J., Spanggaard, I., Thomsen, B. L., Overvad, K. 
& Tjonneland, A. Self- reported and technician- measured 
waist circumferences differ in middle- aged men and 
women. J. Nutr. 135, 2263–2270 (2005).
108. Wolf, A. M. et al. PROCEED: prospective obesity 
cohort of economic evaluation and determinants: 
baseline health and healthcare utilization of the US 
sample. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 10, 1248–1260 
(2008).
109. Janssen, I., Katzmarzyk, P . T . & Ross, R. Body mass 
index, waist circumference, and health risk: evidence 
in support of current National Institutes of Health 
guidelines. Arch. Intern. Med. 162, 2074–2079 
(2002).
110. Ardern, C. I., Janssen, I., Ross, R. & Katzmarzyk, P . T . 
Development of health- related waist circumference 
thresholds within BMI categories. Obes. Res. 12, 
1094–1103 (2004).
111. Bajaj, H. S., Brennan, D. M., Hoogwerf, B. J.,  
Doshi, K. B. & Kashyap, S. R. Clinical utility of waist 
circumference in predicting all- cause mortality in a 
preventive cardiology clinic population: a PreCIS 
database study. Obesity 17, 1615–1620 (2009).
112. Staiano, A. E., Bouchard, C. & Katzmarzyk, P . T .  
BMI- specific waist circumference thresholds to 
discriminate elevated cardiometabolic risk in white 
and African American adults. Obes. Facts 6, 317–324 
(2013).
113. Xi, B. et al. Secular trends in the prevalence of  
general and abdominal obesity among Chinese adults, 
1993–2009. Obes. Rev. 13, 287–296 (2012).
114. Barzin, M. et al. Rising trends of obesity and 
abdominal obesity in 10 years of follow- up among 
T ehranian adults: T ehran lipid and glucose study 
(TLGS). Public Health Nutr. 18, 2981–2989 (2015).
115. Lahti- Koski, M., Harald, K., Mannisto, S., Laatikainen, T . 
& Jousilahti, P . Fifteen- year changes in body mass 
index and waist circumference in Finnish adults.  
Eur. J. Cardiovasc. Prev. Rehabil. 14, 398–404 
(2007).
116. Liese, A. D., Doring, A., Hense, H. W. & Keil, U.  
Five year changes in waist circumference, body mass 
index and obesity in Augsburg, Germany. Eur. J. Nutr. 
40, 282–288 (2001).
117. Czernichow, S. et al. T rends in the prevalence of 
obesity in employed adults in central- western France: 
a population- based study, 1995–2005. Prev. Med. 
48, 262–266 (2009).
118. Ford, E. S., Maynard, L. M. & Li, C. T rends in mean 
waist circumference and abdominal obesity among US 
adults, 1999–2012. JAMA 312, 1151–1153 (2014).
119. Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., Kit, B. K. & Flegal, K. M. 
Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the 
United States, 2011–2012. JAMA 311, 806–814 
(2014).
120. Gearon, E., T anamas, S. K., Stevenson, C., Loh, V. H. Y. & 
Peeters, A. Changes in waist circumference independent 
of weight: implications for population level monitoring of 
obesity. Prev. Med. 111, 378–383 (2018).
121. Okosun, I. S. et al. Abdominal adiposity in U.S. adults: 
prevalence and trends, 1960–2000. Prev. Med. 39, 
197–206 (2004).
122. Examination Committee of Criteria for 'Obesity Disease' 
in Japan & Japan Society for the Study of Obesity.  
New criteria for 'obesity disease' in Japan. Circ. J. 66, 
987–992 (2002).
123. Al- Odat, A. Z., Ahmad, M. N. & Haddad, F. H. 
References of anthropometric indices of central 
obesity and metabolic syndrome in Jordanian men 
and women. Diabetes Metab. Syndr. 6, 15–21 
(2012).
124. Wildman, R. P ., Gu, D., Reynolds, K., Duan, X. & He, J. 
Appropriate body mass index and waist circumference 
cutoffs for categorization of overweight and central 
adiposity among Chinese adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 80, 
1129–1136 (2004).
125. Yoon, Y. S. & Oh, S. W. Optimal waist circumference 
cutoff values for the diagnosis of abdominal obesity 
in Korean adults. Endocrinol. Metab. 29, 418–426 
(2014).
126. Bouguerra, R. et al. Waist circumference cut- off points 
for identification of abdominal obesity among the 
T unisian adult population. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 9, 
859–868 (2007).
127. Delavari, A., Forouzanfar, M. H., Alikhani, S., 
Sharifian, A. & Kelishadi, R. First nationwide study  
of the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome and 
optimal cutoff points of waist circumference in the 
Middle East: the national survey of risk factors for 
noncommunicable diseases of Iran. Diabetes Care 32, 
1092–1097 (2009).
128. Misra, A. et al. Waist circumference cutoff points and 
action levels for Asian Indians for identification of 
abdominal obesity. Int. J. Obes. 30, 106–111 (2006).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of the IAS and 
the ICCR, an independent academic organization based at 
Université Laval, Québec, Canada, who were responsible for 
coordinating the production of our report. No funding or hon-
orarium was provided by either the IAS or the ICCR to the 
members of the writing group for the production of this arti-
cle. The scientific director of the ICCR (J.-P .D.) is funded by a 
Foundation Grant (Funding Reference Number FDN-167278) 
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Author contributions
R.R., I.J.N. and J.-P .D. researched data for the article. R.R., 
I.J.N., S.Y., I.S., J.S., F.B.H., Y.M. and J.-P .D. made a substan-
tial contribution to discussion of the content. R.R., I.J.N. and 
J.-P .D. wrote the article. R.R., I.J.N., I.S., J.S., P .M., R.D.S., 
B.A., A.C., F.B.H., B.A.G., A.Z., P .B., J.-C.F., R.H.E., Y.M. and 
J.-P .D. reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before 
submission.
Competing interests
I.J.N. reports receiving fees for consulting and serving on the 
advisory board from Boehringer Ingelheim/Lilly Alliance and 
AMRA Medical and a research grant from Novo Nordisk. 
F.B.H. reports receiving speaker fees from Metagenics and 
Standard Process and a research grant from California Walnut 
Commission. R.D.S. reports receiving consulting and speaker 
fess from Amgen, Astra Zeneca, Akcea, Biolab, Esperion, 
Kowa, Merck, MSD, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi Regeneron, Akcea, 
Kowa and Esperion. S.Y. reports grants and personal fees 
from Kowa Company, Ltd., Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 
Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Bayer Yakuhin, Ltd., MSD K.K., T akeda 
Pharmaceutical Company, Ltd., Sanwa Kagaku Kenkyusho 
Co., Ltd., Astellas Pharma Inc., Daiichi- Sankyo Company, Ltd., 
Astra Zeneka K.K. and Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.; grants 
from Kyowa Medex Co., Ltd., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim 
Co., Ltd., National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Hayashibara Co., Ltd., T eijin Pharma Limited, Kissei and 
Mochida Pharmaceutical Company, Ltd.; and personal fees 
from Ono Pharmaceutical Company, Ltd., Skylight Biotec, 
Inc., Pfizer, Astellas Amgen, Sanofi and Aegerion. S.Y. also 
has patents issued with Fujirebio and Kyowa Medex Co., Ltd. 
issued. R.H.E. reports his role as a scientific adviser for 
PROMINENT (Kowa Company Ltd.) and being on the advisory 
committees for Novo Nordisk and Sanofi/Regeneron.  
The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Peer review information
Nature Reviews Endocrinology thanks R. Kelishadi and the 
other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer 
review of this work.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41574-019-0310-7.
Open Access This work is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Inter-
national License. The images or other third 
party material in this article are included in the article’s 
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the 
credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative 
Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from 
the license holder to reproduce the material. T o view a copy 
of this license, visit http://cr eativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/.
RelATed lInks
measurement guidelines for waist circumference:  
http://www.myhealthywaist.org/evaluating- cmr/clinical- tools/ 
waist- circumference-measurement- guidelines/index.html
 
© The Author(s) 2020
  volume 16 | march 2020 | 189
NaTure revIeWS | EndOcRInOlOgy
ConSenSuS Statement